Josef Albers Glass, Color, and Light 



152 pages u ith $6 full-color plates and 
19 black-and-white illustrations 



As a master at Germany's Bauhaus until 1933, and 
then as a professor in American schools such as Black 
Mountain College and Yale University, Josef Albers 
(1888-1976) influenced scores of young artists. His 
Homage to the Square series of paintings remains a 
touchstone of twentieth-century art. Yet Albers 's 
first great works of art — the glass pictures that he 
made in Germany starting in 1921 — remain little 
known. First using found fragments of colored glass, 
and then employing a sophisticated sandblasting 
process on glass, Albers created a new art form as 
spectacular in its mastery of color and light as it was 
inherently fragile. 

Josef Albers: Glass, Color, and Light is the first 
monograph devoted to Albers 's work in glass. 
Accompanying the color reproductions of every 
extant glass picture is full documentation by Brenda 
Danilowitz of the Josef Albers Foundation. This 
volume also illustrates and provides information on 
Albers 's architectural commissions in glass and 
those works that were lost or destroyed after the 
artist fled Nazi Germany. Essays by Nicholas Fox 
Weber, Executive Director of the Josef Albers 
Foundation, and Fred Licht, Curator of the Peggy 
Guggenheim Collection, illuminate the many 
themes suggested by this extraordinary group of 
works, while a chronology of Albers 's life and 
professional career places the glass works in the 
context of his entire oeuvre. A statement by the 
artist, an exhibition history, and a select 
bibliography make this the first comprehensive 
source on the subject. 

Cover: 

Park, ca. 1924 (cat. no. 7). Glass, wire, metal, and 
paint, in wood frame; 49.5 x 38 cm (l9'/ 2 x 15 inches). 
The Josef Albers Foundation. 

Printed in Germany 



Digitized by the Internet Archive 

in 2012 with funding from 

Metropolitan New York Library Council - METRO 



http://archive.org/details/glascoliOOalbe 



Josef Albers Glass, Color. andLight 



Josef Albers Glass, Color, andLight 



An exhibition organized by the Peggy Guggenheim Collection. Venice, and the 
Josef Albers Foundation, Orange, Connecticut 



GUGGENHEIM MUSEUM 



© 1994 The Solomon R. Guggenheim Foundation, 

New York. All rights reserved. 

Published 1994. Second edition 1994. 

ISBN 0-8109-6864-9 (hardcover) 

ISBN 0-89207-128-1 (softcover) 

Printed in Germany by Cantz. 

All Josef Albers works © 1994 The Josef Albers Foundation, 
Orange, Connecticut. Used by permission. All rights reserved. 

Guggenheim Museum Publications 

1071 Fifth Avenue 

New York, New York 10128 

Hardcover edition distributed by 

Harry N. Abrams, Incorporated, New York 

A Times Mirror Company 

Project editor: Laura L. Morris 

Design: Cara Galowitz, Michelle Martino 

Production: Elizabeth Levy 

In most cases, photographs have been lent by the owners of the 
art works. Additional photo credits appear below. 

Essays: p. 8, Umbo; p. 11, David Heald; p. 12, Associated Press; 
p. 16, Elke Walford, Fotowerkstatt, Hamburger Kunsthalle; 
p. 18, Brother Placid, OSB. Catalogue: nos. 3, 14, 19, 31, 
Lee Stalsworth; nos. 4, 7, 8, II, 16, 17, 26, 29, 34, 35, 41, 46, 
48-52, Tim Nighswander; nos. 5, 12, 20, 21, 28, 33, 44, 
Ray Errett; no. 10, Atelier Giinter Jagenburg, Fotografie fur 
Werbung und Industrie, Leverkusen; no. 22, Lee B. Ewing; 
no. 32, Haus fur konstructive und konkrete Kunst, Zurich; 
no. 36, Piermarco Menini; nos. 42, 45, David Heald; no. 43, 
Rudolf Wakonigg, Miinster. Appendix of Destroyed and Lost 
Works: nos. 1, 2, 4—8, The Josef Albers Foundation; no. 3, 
The Busch-Reisinger Museum, Harvard University Art 
Museums, Gift of the Artist, ©President and Fellows, Harvard 
College, Harvard University Art Museum. Appendix of Works in 
Glass for Architectural Projects: nos. 1—7, The Josef Albers 
Foundation; no. 8, Bill Hedrich, Hedrich-Blessing, Chicago. 
Chronology: nos. 1, 2, The Josef Albers Foundation; nos. 3, 4, 
Umbo; no. 5, Rudolph Burckhardt; no. 6, Jon Naar. 

Cover: Park, ca. 1924 (cat. no. 7). Glass, wire, metal, and 
paint, in wood trame; 49.5 x 38 cm (19 'h x 15 inches). 
The Josef Albers Foundation. 



Josef Albers Glass, Color, and Light 

Peggy Guggenheim Collection, Venice 
March 30-July 10, 1994 

Palazzo delle Esposizioni, Rome 
July 21-October 3, 1994 

IVAM Centre Julio Gonzalez, Valencia 
November 3, 1994-January 8, 1995 

Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, New York 
June 7-Sept. 17, 1995 

Smith College Museum of Art, Northampton, Massachusetts 
Fall 1995 



Contents Preface 

Philip Rylands 



A New Light: Josef Albers's Work in Glass 
Nicholas Fox Weber 

Albers: Glass, Color, and Light 14 

Fred Lit hi 

Catalogue 27 

Brenda Danilowitz 

Appendix of Destroyed and Lost Works 129 

Appendix ol Works in Glass for [35 

Architectural Projects 

"A New Type of Glass Picture' 141 

Josef Albers 

Chronology 14 J 

Exhibitions 148 

Select Bibliography 149 



Preface In October 1942, at the opening party for her 

Philip Rylands museum-gallery in New York, Peggy Guggenheim 

wore one earring by Alexander Calder and another 
by Yves Tanguy to show, as she wrote in her 
memoirs, "my impartiality between Surrealist and 
abstract art." Peggy's perception of Modern art as 
two opposite trends was derived, apparently, from 
Marcel Duchamp, who had taught her the difference 
between abstraction and Surrealism when she first 
decided to dedicate herself to art, in 1938. This 
impartiality is perhaps what makes the Peggy 
Guggenheim Collection unique. Its coverage of so 
much of early twentieth-century avant-garde art is 
such that one sometimes feels lured into identifying 
its lacunae, as if it were a stamp collection with 
incomplete sets. Although the collection includes 
works by Paul Klee and Vasily Kandinsky from 
their Bauhaus years, works by other masters of the 
school are missing. Given the preeminence of Josef 
Albers in the history of twentieth-century 
abstraction (both in Europe and America) and the 
importance of abstraction in Peggy's collection, his 
absence is curious. It was unlikely, however, that 
Albers and Peggy would have crossed paths in the 
1940s, when he taught at Black Mountain College in 
North Carolina and she was based in New York. 
Furthermore, by the time Albers 's fame began to 
spread in the United States during the 1950s, Peggy 
had already turned her back on New York and 
settled in Venice. 

It is, therefore, with a proud sense of enriching one 
of the key elements of the Peggy Guggenheim 
Collection — European abstraction — that we present 
this exhibition, the first dedicated solely to Albers 's 
works in glass and the first important exhibition in 
Italy of the artist's work. In addition, it marks a 
crescendo of interest in the production of the 
German Bauhaus. 

In 1988, the Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum in 
New York organized a retrospective of the art of 
Albers, which was curated by Nicholas Fox Weber, 
Executive Director of the Josef Albers Foundation in 
Orange, Connecticut. The Josef Albers Foundation 
later, in 1991, made a munificent gift of nineteen 
works by Albers to the Solomon R. Guggenheim 
Foundation. Conversations between Nicholas Fox 
Weber and the Peggy Guggenheim Collection's 
Curator, Fred Licht, led to the conception of the 
current specialized exhibition project. We are 
extremely grateful to Nicholas Fox Weber and to 



the trustees of the Josef Albers Foundation, who have 
in large part made this exhibition possible. The 
foundation has lent the majority of the works in the 
exhibition, making them available for additional 
showings, and lias enthusiastically supported our 
requests lor loans from other collections. The Josef 
Albers Foundation has also helped to resolve difficult 
questions of framing and installation and has 
assumed many of the preparatory costs. We would 
like to thank the foundation's Brenda Danilowitz, 
Curatorial Associate; Kelly Feeney, Curatorial 
Associate; and Phyllis Fitzgerald, Administrative 
Assistant, for their indefatigable work on the 
exhibition and this catalogue. 

We would also like to express our gratitude to Jared 
Bark and James Dearing, whose inventive and 
meticulous framing has enabled us to show the glass 
works to the best possible effect for the first time. 
They have employed professionalism, technical 
know-how, and a sense of aesthetics in creating new 
standards for the presentation of these works, and 
they did so under a demanding schedule. 

This catalogue is more than the permanent 
record of a transient event. Brenda Danilowitz has 
documented all known works on glass by Albers, 
extant or otherwise, and has thus contributed 
to the catalogue raisonne of Albers's oeuvre. This 
has been a major project, in research and in 
editing, conducted by the staff of the Josef Albers 
Foundation together with the Publications 
Department of the Solomon R. Guggenheim 
Museum — Anthony Calnek, Director of 
Publications, and Laura Morris, Associate Editor, in 
particular — and with Chiara Barbieri, Deputy 
Director's Assistant, of the Peggy Guggenheim 
Collection. 

We would like to acknowledge the role of certain 
Guggenheim staff members who have worked 
beyond the call of duty to make Josef Albers: Glass, 
Color, and Light a success: Fred Licht contributed his 
expertise and wrote an essay for this catalogue; Paul 
Schwartzbaum, Chief Conservator and Assistant 
Director for Technical Services for the New York 
museum and Conservator for the Venice institution, 
carried out advisory and supervisory work that no 
one else could have done so ably. Renata Rossani, 
Administrator, stoically worked out all the shipping 
arrangements (and many other details) together with 
Chiara Barbieri. Claudia Rech, Development and 
Public Affairs Officer, and Annarita Fuso, Public- 



Affairs Assistant, have managed the public-relations 

aspects of the project. 
The Peggy Guggenheim Collection receives an 

important annual grant for its exhibitions and 
programs from the Regione Veneto. Since 1992, the 
collection has benefited greatly from the generous 
support of a group of international corporate 
benefactors, Intrapresa? Collezione Guggenheim. 
This association includes Aermec, Arclinea, Bisazza 
Mosaico, Cartiere Miliani Fabriano, Gruppo 3M Italia, 
Impresa Gadola, Istituto Poligrafico e Zecca dello 
Stato, Knoll Italia, Reggiani Illuminazione, Rex 
Built-in, Safilo Group, and Swatch. The Peggy 
Guggenheim Collection is grateful for financial 
support for specific aspects of the project from 
Alitalia and from the Josef Albers Foundation. 

It has been a great pleasure to collaborate with the 
other institutions hosting Josef Albas: Glass, Color. 
and Light, including the Palazzo delle Esposizioni, 
Rome; IVAM Centre Julio Gonzalez, Valencia; and 
Smith College Museum of Art, Northampton, 
Massachusetts. 

This exhibition has been made possible both by the 
loan of works from the Josef Albers Foundation and 
by the generosity of other museums and collectors. 
The international loan of glass objects represents no 
small gesture of confidence and is a gratifying 
expression of support. Therefore, we most warmly 
thank Mr. and Mrs. James H. Clark, Jr. of Dallas, 
Texas; the Josef Albers Museum, Bottrop, Germany; 
the Department of Twentieth Century Art of the 
Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York; the 
Hirshhorn Museum and Sculpture Garden, 
Washington, D.C.; the Kunsthaus Zurich; as well as 
our colleagues at the Solomon R. Guggenheim 
Museum. 



A New Light: Josef Alberss Work in Glass 

Nicholas Fox Weber 



AJbers with Herbert and Murzi Bayer, Ascona, 
Switzerland, 1929. 



Windows bring light into darkness. In Gothic 
cathedrals, not only did they illuminate vast 
interiors — in which, without them, one would 
barely have been able to see beyond the haze of 
candlelight and oil lamps — but these openings to 
the outdoors also represented the lux nova (new 
light) ot Christian faith. Window light overcame the 
darkness or blindness of all that had preceded. 
Where previously there had been confusion, and 
vision had been obscured, once the sun's rays 
passed through glass there was, quite literally, 
enlightenment. 

It was the image of one of these Gothic cathedrals 
that, in 1920, beckoned Josef Albers to the Bauhaus. 
The cathedral was in a woodcut by Lyonel Feiningcr 
on the cover of a simple four-page pamphlet 
describing the experimental new school in Weimar. 
Feininger's image was there, ostensibly, as a symbol 
of the integration of all the arts. Walter Gropius, the 
founding director of the school, reiterated that goal 
in a statement inside the pamphlet, which stressed 
proficiency in craft. But the cathedral also implied a 
certain spiritualism. With its towers soaring 
heavenward and its wondrous windows, it signified a 
new light. 

Windows not only invite brightness, but also allow 
the old to be discarded. "I was thirty-two . . . threw 
all my old things out the window, started once more 
from the bottom. That was the best step I made in 
my life,"' Albers said of his move to the Bauhaus. 
Going there was no easy trick for the impoverished 
public-school teacher, who had to arrange funding 
from the regional teaching system of Nordrhein- 
Westfalen, with which he was affiliated, and then 
forsake almost all of the traditions in which he had 
been educated. But it was worth chucking the past 
to enter this brave new world. 

It was perfectly fitting that windows were what 
Albers elected to create once he was at the Bauhaus. 
Glass was his medium of choice throughout his years 
at the school, both when he was a student and after 
he was elevated to the position ot master. His 
fondness tor the material persisted through every 
incarnation of the Bauhaus: from its infancy in 
Weimar, through its heyday in Dessau, to its last 
legs in Berlin, where it struggled nobly to survive 
until the gestapo padlocked the doors and tried to 
shatter the dream. Glass enabled Albers to realize 
his most cherished uoals; with this relatively 
ordinary form of matter, he could make a pier&lt; ing 



IO 




Lyonel Feininger's Cathedral for the cover of the 1919 Bauhaus 
program. Woodcut, printed in black, on paper, block 30.5 x 
19 cm (12 x 7V2 inches). The Museum of Modern Art, New 
York, Gift of Abby Aldrich Rockefeller 156.45. 
Photograph © 1994 The Museum of Modern Art, New York. 



light shine brightly and the old and dark disappear. 
Technical know-how could lead to spiritual uplift. 
Mastery of craft might beget poetry and laughter. 
And with glass the artist could give exultant voice 
to a range of resplendent, and seemingly holy, colors. 

The clarity implicit in the lux nova was Josef 
Albers's perpetual aim. From the time of the early, 
single-line drawings of farm animals that he 
made as a grade-school teacher in his mid-twenties, 
through the twenty-six years he tirelessly pursued 
his Homages to the Square — between 1950, when 
he was sixty-two, and 1976, the year of his death — 
he eschewed the murky and vague in favor of the 
crisp and decisive. In his work and teachings, 
he always made claim for the value of staying away 
from private emotions because they are difficult 
to fathom accurately and are not universal. Art 
should provide something else: a lift, an awakening, 
a removal into another, brighter sphere. No wonder 
the fabulous substance of glass offered Albers so 
much. Its translucency, its vibrant transmission of 
color, its mutability, and its ability to be cut, 
assembled, and sandblasted in myriad arrangements 
that bear no direct evidence of personal handwriting 
made all of the spiritual and visual possibilities 
resoundingly, gloriously apparent. 

As much as Albers regarded his move to the 
Bauhaus and his immersion in the making 
of abstract art as an about-face shift, it was not, 
however, the total schism with his own past that 
he suggested. Born in 1888 in the industrial 
city of Bottrop — located in Westphalia, not far 
from the Miinsterland, a pocket of Catholicism in 
northern Germany — the artist was brought up a 
Catholic, and knew and respected the dogmas 
and traditions inculcated upon him since birth. 
The faith and the texts of his religion remained 
with him always, as did the training he had 
received from his father, who, by Albers's account, 
had shown him how to etch and paint glass. At 
the Bauhaus, he approached the medium in a 
completely different and pioneering way, but he 
did so with values that had been paramount to 
him for as long as he could remember: a high 
regard for traditional craftsmanship and a sense of 
the miraculous. 

Glass was the symbol of an essential basis oi 
Catholicism: the conception whereby Mary became 
the mother of Jesus. A medieval hymn made clear 
the metaphoric role of the material: 



As the sunbeam through the glass 
Passetb but not breaketh, 
So the Virgin, as she was, 
Virgin still remaineth.* 

In Northern Renaissance art, glass — in the windows 
of the church-interiors where the Annunciation is 
depicted, and in the glistening, womblike carafes 
near the Virgin — signifies Jesus's lineage as the son 
of God. In the broadest, most general way, it evokes 
the light and brightness born of Christianity; at the 
same time, specifically and literally, it symbolizes the 
miracle of the birth of Christ. Consciously or 
unconsciously, the devout and erudite Albers knew 
this even before he began to work with the new 
material. It was sacred, the stuff of revelations. It 
represented thinking on another sphere, an 
acceptance of the inexplicable, and the wonder of 
faith. 

Albers had made one window before he went to the 
Bauhaus, for St. Michael's Church in Bottrop (see 
no. i in the Appendix of Works in Glass for 
Architectural Projects). He completed it in 1918, after 
about a year's work. A distinctly modern rose 
window, its lines and lettering were highly charged 
with the energies of Art Nouveau and Expressionism. 
Surrounding the vibrant rose motif were the words 
rosa mystica (mystic rose) and ora pro nobis (pray for 
us), in Albers's personalized version of the traditional 
German lettering style known as Fraktur. While the 
St. Michael's composition was, aesthetically, a far cry 
from what he made later at the Bauhaus and from 
the body of his glass work that we now celebrate, this 
church commission makes clear that to Albers, from 
the start, glass represented holiness. And holiness 
was very much on Albers's mind. In his drawings and 
prints of that pre-Bauhaus period, he returned time 
and again to church facades and interiors. Be they the 
cathedrals of Cologne or Miinster, or the smaller 
structures of modest Westphalian villages, houses of 
religion were a recurrent theme. 

During the years that he made the window at 
St. Michael's and taught in Bottrop, Albers was 
studying at the Essen Kunstgewerbeschule under the 
Dutch artist Jan Thorn-Prikker, a glass craftsman. 
Thorn-Prikker worked with Hat expanses of bright 
color and stressed that real light was as important to 
an art work as its drawing or its painted color. His 
dream, he suggested, was to paint with the sun 
itself. Although Albers later complained when art 




Josef Albers, Homage to the Square: Apparition, 1959. Oil on 
Masonire, 120.7 x 120.7 cm (47'/= x 47 V: inches). Solomon R. 
Guggenheim Museum, New York 61.1590. 



12 




Josef and Anni Albers upon their arrival in New York, 
November 25, 1933. 



historians overemphasized his connection to Thorn- 
Prikker — the artist never admitted freely to 
influences — there is no question that in Essen his 
understanding of glass grew, and he sensed its vast 
potential and vigor. 

The specifics of how Albers developed his glass art 
at the Bauhaus, and the connections of his work to 
the art of others, have been elucidated with insight 
by Fred Licht in the following essay. As with any 
medium in which Josef Albers worked, the artist 
noticed what others were doing, but still found in it 
unique and unprecedented possibilities. In glass, his 
tireless experimentation and jubilant immersion in 
both abstraction and other aspects of Modernism 
resulted in an extraordinary and highly varied body 
of work, as Professor Licht explains. 

Glass permits the process of transformation so 
pivotal to Albers's notion of the value of art. For his 
early assemblages, he picked up discarded fragments 
at the Weimar town dump. Garbage became jewels. 
In later works, glassmakers' samples acquire a 
celestial radiance; an orderly grid becomes a source of 
euphoria; stencils and the machinery of sandblasting 
help make objects that dance with rhythmic leaps. In 
the opaque works, the artist achieved an illusion of 
translucency, so that light that is actually reflected 
appears to be emanating from a direct source. A cool 
geometry gives voice to luxuriance and freedom. 

In an essay on Rembrandt, Jean Genet wrote: '"To 
want to be nothing' is an oft-heard phrase. It is 
Christian. Are we to understand that man seeks to 
lose, to let dissolve, that which, in one way or other, 
singularizes him in a trivial way, that which gives 
him his opacity, in order, on the day of his death, to 
offer God a pure, not even iridescent, transparency?" 3 
With glass, Albers did indeed achieve the objective 
of both his early Catholicism and his later, absolute 
devotion to color and form: the eradication of his own 
individuality. The denial of self was in deference to a 
greater, universal truth — even if, in the visual arena, 
the truth was that nothing was certain. He did not 
go the full distance that Genet describes, to pure, 
colorless transparency. But — when vision was his 
subject, and optical, spiritual transformation his 
quarry — he shed both personal encumbrances and 
any visual details that struck him as disturbing or 
gratuitous. 

This remained true for the rest of his life, from the 
time the Bauhaus closed and he abandoned glass, 
until his death some forty years later. A pure and 



selfless approach underlies his paintings in oil on 
Masonite and his engravings and embossings. He 
manipulated those mediums to emulate many of t he- 
conditions of glassmaking, above all in the Homagt to 
the Square panels. In those paintings, which he 
termed his "platters to serve color," 4 the application 
of six to ten coats of white Liquitex gesso on top of a 
hard, unyielding surface creates a luminous and 
neutral setting where color can have its fullest voice. 

The substitution of new materials for his beloved 
medium of the Bauhaus was completely necessary. 
Glass, in fact, was not above what Genet 
characterizes as "trivial." Its mundanity was evident 
in the disaster Albers and his wife, Anni, had 
encountered a month after arriving in America in 
November 1933, when they went to inspect their 
crates of household goods at the U.S. Customs House 
in New York. Albers wrote to the Director of 
Customs at the Treasury Department in Washington, 
D.C., on February 12, 1934 (with someone else clearly 
putting his words into English): 

We found all our boxes except one broken open without 
keys. Oar things were carelessly thrown around on the 
floors and tables. . . . It was a disgusting sight, showing 
the entire ruthlessness and inefficiency of those who had 
handled the articles. . . . Ten of my thirty-two Glass 
Pictures were broken or cracked. . . . They had been 
ruthlessly and carelessly stacked against each other 
without the least consideration of their fragility, size, or 
weight.' 

There may be a very simple reason that Albers never 
worked in glass again: the material was too fragile, 
the loss too painful. The possibilities for spiritual 
purity had been truly shattered by human 
brutality — the very force that Josef and Anni Albers 
had fled in Germany, and that, in a different form, 
sullied their arrival in their new sanctuary. Holy as it 
was, glass could not avoid or escape life's vicissitudes. 
Within the decade following the closing of the 
Bauhaus and the Albers' arrival in America, glass 
would be crushed into splinters on Kristallnacht, 
and the destruction of the material would become as 
portentous and significant a symbol as the passing of 
light through a perfect, round window. The precious 
windows of Gothic cathedrals would have to be 
removed and packed away it they were to survive the 
hideous onslaught; many did not. 
No wonder, then, that Albers sought the value of 



glass in safer, seemingly more permanent mediums. 
But, fortunately, a number of pieces have survived 

from his early, jubilant period, and the restorer's art 
has proved beneficent for some that were ( racked or 
broken entirely. The presentation of so much of this 
body of work is the unique treat offered by the 
current exhibition. Genet wrote in that same essaj : 
"A work of art should exalt only those truths which 
are not demonstrable, and which are even 'false,' 
those which we cannot carry to their ultimate 
conclusions without absurdity, without negating both 
them and ourself. They will never have the good or 
bad fortune to be applied. Let them live by virtue of 
the song that they have become and that they 
inspire. "'' This exhibition, Josef Albers: Glass, Color. 
and Light, permits the song of those elusive, 
miraculous, and incomprehensible truths to be sung 
with resonance and harmony. 

1. Quoted in Neil Welliver, "Albers on Albers," Art Sews 64, 
no. 9 (Jan. 1966), p. 48. 

2. Quoted in Erwin Panofsky, Earl) Netherlandish Painting: I: 
Origins and Character (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University 
Press, 1966), p. 144. First edition, 1953. 

3. Jean Genet, "Something Which Seemed to Resemble 
Decay . . . ," trans. Bernard Frechtman, Antaeus, no. S4 (spring 
1985), p. 114. 

4. Conversation with the author, January 11, 1974. 

5. Letter in the archives of thejosel Albers Foundation, 
Orange, Conn. 

6. Genet, p. 108. 



13 



Albers: Glass, Color, and Light 

Fred Licht 



Rhenish Legend, 1921. Glass assemblage mounted on copper 
sheet, 49.5 x 44.4 cm (19 'A x 17 7. inches). The Metropolitan 
Museum of Art, New York, Gift of the Artist, 1972 1972. 40.1. 



/ took him photographs of constructivist pictures. Kafka 
said, "They are merely dreams of a marvellous America, oj 
a wonderland oj unlimited possibilities. That is perfectly 
understandable, becaust Europt is becoming mort and mm 
a land oj impossible limitations. " 

Gustavjanouch, Conversations with Kafka 

Before artists knew how to render light 
illusionistically — when light could only be 
represented emblematically (for example, as a halo) 
or integrated directly with imagery (as in stained- 
glass windows) — it was universally understood as 
the manifestation of a divine presence. It 
represented illumination, enlightenment, and 
the grace through which man could orient himself 
among the dangers and pitfalls ot the world. 

This tradition in the arts began to undergo radical 
changes around 1800, as first evident in the work of 
Francisco de Goya. In his prints, Goya used light 
and dark not in terms of their metaphysical 
meanings but simply as white, black, and 
intermediate values of gray. The struggle for new 
meanings and aesthetic functions for light and dark 
is one of the most fascinating phenomena of Modern 
art. In the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, the 
need to explore light was a paramount concern of 
artists ranging from the Impressionists, who insisted 
on a morally neutral basis for all visual experience, 
to the Fauves, who used the dynamics of color to 
generate light, to Pablo Picasso, who used an image 
of a lightbulb to illuminate the destruction of 
Guernica. 

Josef Albers 's exploration of the functions ot light 
is fully within this tradition. His work in glass, 
most of it dating from the 1920s, is the key to his 
entire oeuvre, including the culminating Homage to 
the Square series, one of the essential totems of 
twentieth-century art. When Albers 's first hesitant 
searches came to an end, when he joined the 
Bauhaus in 1920 as a student, glass became his 
central concern. To better comprehend the role of 
Albers 's achievements in this medium, we must first 
examine the traditions that influenced and 
conditioned both the Bauhaus and Albers himself. 

Few, if any, national traditions have precise points 
of origin that dominate and shape all future 
developments as does Germany. In philosophy, we 
automatically think ot Kant as a starting point, in 
music, Beethoven, and in literature, Goethe. True. 
there are predecessors for all these exemplars. Luther 



15 



1 6 




Albers, 1919. 



came before Kant, Bach before Beethoven, and 
Klopstock before Goethe. Be that as it may, Luther, 
Bach, and Klopstock did not found continua of 
German philosophy, music, and poetry, respectively, 
whereas from Kant, Beethoven, and Goethe, 
they seem to rise like a consistent and majestic 
monument, without seams or interruptions. 

In German visual arts, there is no single figure 
who serves such a role. Typifying an important trend 
that continued to develop through the nineteenth 
century, the Nazarenes sought moral regeneration 
through art by attempting to revive a lost Golden 
Age. Caspar David Friedrich represents the note of 
isolated, naive introspection that is characteristic of 
so much of German art. Philipp Otto Runge, the 
most complex of the founding fathers of German art 
and the most influential upon the formative years of 
subsequent artists, combined in his work a scientific 
bent, a sense of religious obligation, and a powerful 
impulse toward historical speculation. 

It may seem farfetched to return to German 
Romanticism when discussing such a militant, 
sober, and even tough twentieth-century artist as 
Albers. Yet the fruitful studies by such scholars and 
critics of Modern art as Robert Rosenblum and 
Werner Hofmann have proved conclusively that the 
impulses generated in the period around 1800 
wielded a powerfully fertile influence on twentieth- 
century art.' In addition, the years immediately after 
World War I bear certain striking spiritual 
similarities to the early Romantic period in the 
desperate yet exhilarating sense of having reached a 
zero point from which to start afresh. Both periods 
also nurtured the hope of salvation through 
communality, which was expressed in the arts by the 
emergence of numerous tightly woven associations. 
(In the post— World War I period, the Bauhaus was 
far more close-knit than earlier associations such as 
Der Blaue Reiter or Die Briicke, and the various 
Dada groups were marked by a militant solidarity.) 
Art in both epochs assumed a messianic function 
and was aimed at the conversion of all levels of 
society. Similarly, the absorption of the sciences into 
art was influential upon both the Romantics and the 
artists growing to maturity during and immediately 
after World War I. 

If the anti-Romantic Goya had eliminated light 
as a symbol of divine manifestation, then the 
Romantics were engaged in a passionate struggle 
to resurrect light as a vehicle for metaphysical 



speculation consonant with the new circumstances 
of a secularized world. Friedrich's work fascinates 
largely as a result of his gamble upon the 
effectiveness of conveying meaning distilled from 
darkness — his Monk by the Sea is the perfect 
Romantic counterpart of Goya's Black Paintings — 
and from light — The Crass in tht Mountains (Tetscben 
Altarpiece) 3 brings him breathtakingly close to the 
abyss of Hollywood kitsch. Still, Friedrich remains 
within the tradition of easel painting. 

Runge, however, discovered new paths with his 
eternally perplexing Morning. By containing a 
luminous inner image within the darker outer 
frame, and using discrepant scales, he translated the 
purpose and meaning of medieval stained-glass 
windows into a modern mode. As in stained glass, 
the central "light image" can be perceived only in 
opposition to the darkness that surrounds it. (By 
contrast, in Garavaggesque lighting, light and dark 
are seen together and function within the same 
continuity of space.) The inner image in Runge's 
painting is diaphanous and incorporeal, while the 
darkness of the peripheral image pertains to the 
reality of earthly and netherworldly things. In his 
later works on glass, Albers played with similar 
relationships of image to ground, of transparent to 
opaque, of light as pulsating life against a passive 
expanse of a single hue. This is true not only of the 
glass panels but also of the later Homage to the 
Square series. It is perhaps not amiss to point out 
here that Runge's Morning, although not a square 
within a square, is nevertheless a rectangle within 
a rectangle. I do not want to suggest a direct 
connection between Runge and Albers but rather a 
common cultural matrix that was first revealed by 
Runge and then recast in new terms by Albers. 

The first fruits of Albers 's early obsession with 
glass composition, Figure (1921, cat. no. 1) and 
Rheinischt Legende (Rhenish Legem/, 1921, cat. no. 2), 
lie within the tradition of medieval glass windows. 
They are made up of glass fragments of varying 
shapes, sizes, and densities, which act as carefully 
articulated color areas against the black of the metal 
frames. His choice of materials, disparate pieces of 
glass culled from the city clump, was not suggested 
by Dacla experiments but was forced upon the artist 
by his financial situation and the shortage of art 
supplies in Germany during this period. Yet in each 
panel, Albers perfectly integrated the varying 
densities of glass and the autonomous elements of 




17 



Philipp Otto Runge, Morning, 1808. Oil on canvas, 108.9 x 
85.4 cm (42 "A x 33 7« inches). Hamburger Kunsth.ille. 



it 










H 


■ 






m 
































, W,l 
















































































































































































L 
























































































e 












. 






































































, 








































■ i 














■ ■ ■■! 


tmmmm 


















. 






■ 
■ 












_ 






■i 


III 













Park, ca. 1924. Glass, wire, metal, and paint, in wood 
frame, 49.5 x 38 cm (19 'A x 15 inches). The Josef Albers 
Foundation GL-28. 



composition (i.e., luminosity, hue, degree of 
transparency, and actual dimension) to form a 
harmonious constellation and to conjure a luminous 
magic. Devoid of any sense of academic exercise, the 
works are fully resolved and highly expressive, 
reflecting the intellectual energy and the perceptual 
discipline that must have gone into them. The 
masters of the Bauhaus were so deeply impressed by 
these panels that they reopened the shop for glass 
production, which had been closed, and put it under 
Albers 's direction. 

Albers 's maturation as an artist was marked by 
self-discipline and a measured use of former 
experience as a safe point of departure, rather than 
by a pursuit of novelty. His next two works, 
Fensterbild {Window Picture, 1921, cat. no. 3) and 
Untitled (1921, cat. no. 4), clearly document how 
Albers checked each new expressive impulse 
with the knowledge he had gained from previous 
works. The fragments of wire mesh of irregular, 
indeterminate shape and dimension in Untitled are 
reminiscent of medieval glass leading but are 
actually as random as the pieces of glass with which 
they are visually, but not structurally, associated. It 
is only in Gitterbild (Grid Mounted, 1921, cat. no. 5) 
that metal is used as a structural device. The broad 
spectrum of colors characteristic of the earlier panels 
remains in this work, but the shape and size of 
the glass pieces unexpectedly have been regimented 
to a consistent module. The last remnant of metal 
used for purely visual purposes is the net of very fine 
wire that covers (instead of contains) the individual 
glass tesserae, dividing them vertically into three, 
or into tiny tic-tac-toe patterns. 

Park (ca. 1924, cat. no. 7) represents a 
fundamentally new departure. Albers imparted 
to Park a far more sober, intensely disciplined style 
that would mark his later work, leaving behind 
those impulses rooted in the spontaneity of 
German and French expressionist tendencies. 4 
Material needs had dictated the capricious nature 
of Albers 's first two glass panels and made them the 
incunabula to what later became known as 
assemblage. Grid Mounted sacrifices the exuberant 
profusion of shapes of the earlier works but 
retains the lyrical freedom of their wide chromatic 
range. Yellows, purples, oranges, whites, and greens 
give a staccato, syncopated quality to the 
composition, while the wire-mesh covering adds 
irregular ornamentation. 



In Park, Albers finally did away with diversely 
shaped elements and substituted for them a logical, 
tectonic organization, which orders distinct groups 
oi green, blue, and white rectangles into a modular 
system. The metal framework, which still plays a 
slightly calligraphic role in Grid Mounted, assumes 
an exclusively architectural function in Park. Only 
the changes in thickness of the metal strips afford a 
small measure of variation. The slightly wider strips 
of leading divide the areas of color into distinct 
groups of blocks of a single color or into 
checkerboard arrangements. In the vertical 
configuration of olive-green squares on the left, the 
thicker strips not only outline the particular 
chromatic group but also accentuate the shift from 
left to right of the lower block of olive-green 
squares. Although far from uniform, the 
arrangement of the individual squares and the linear 
structure retain an architectural rather than 
expressive effect. 

Albers renounced the lavish bouquet of rubies, 
ultramarines, yellows, and greens of the earlier 
panels, reducing his palette in Park to a narrow 
range of green and blue hues, highlighted by sparse, 
small areas of white. Instead of arranging distinct 
colors for variety and contrapuntal complexity, 
Albers now concentrated on constantly shifting, 
subtle modulations in color groups, creating what 
can be called a climate of color. It is precisely that 
climate, first created in Park, that the artist 
developed consistently in his later work, reaching its 
apogee in the Homage to the Square series. In Park, 
Albers set aside the seductive powers of color in 
order to reveal its spiritual energy. 

One small area of Park stands out in serene but 
insistent contradiction to the work's severe economy 
in color range and the basic form of the square: the 
two rectangles and squares of a mildly glowing pink 
to the right and below the center of the panel. 
Within the context of the repetitive web of squares 
surrounding it, the black lines within the pink area 
declare themselves very eloquently to be a cross, 
which we can perceive as a purely formal device or as 
a mystic symbol. In either case, the area's effect of 
warmth and stable tranquility within the overall 
syncopation of cool colors is deeply moving. Isolated 
and diminutive, the area asserts itself as the heart 
of the entire composition and sets the tone to which 
all other hues are attuned. 

This ardent glow is also a last reminder of Albers's 



roots in the German Romantic tradition. Only 
rarely did he again make reference to the 
religious/visual strategies of Runge and Friedrich. 
Yet, if we wish to grasp the full implications oi 
his later development, it is useful to remember his 
accomplishment in Park. Light, whether evoked by 
pure color combinations (as in the Homage to the 
Square paintings) or by rhythmic interactions and 
rapid switches between reflecting and matte surfaces 
(as in the elaborate glass works of the 1920s), 
represents illumination in the spiritual sense of the 
word. Nor should we forget that in 1955 Albers 
completed perhaps his most successful monumental 
commission, a large window for the altar of the 
Abbot's Chapel in St. John's Abbey Church in 
Collegeville, Minnesota (see no. 7 in the Appendix 
of Works in Glass for Architectural Projects). Whitt 
Cross Window is made of photosensitive glass, which 
did not exist in the 1920s. Although this window is 
more technologically complex than Park, it is 
directly related to the earlier work and is imbued 
with the spiritual ideals of Albers's earliest years. 

The early assemblages and "grid pictures" clearly 
belong to the realm of the pictorial, and can be 
looked at, enjoyed, and studied like easel paintings. 
Park is a decisive step away from the work as 
independent panel, drawing much closer to the 
structural, tectonic image integrated into a larger 
architectural context/ Albers's earlier works in glass 
and Paul Klee's paintings of the early Bauhaus 
period bear certain similarities (although it is 
impossible to resolve the question of which artist, 
Albers or Klee, influenced the other, or whether it 
was a mutual exchange). After Park, the two artists 
travel distinctly different paths, Albers pursuing a 
course toward constantly increasing monumental itv 
and structural discipline and Klee cultivating the 
endless possibilities of traditional easel painting. 

Also after this point, Albers moved beyond the 
ornamental nature inherent to stained glass (as 
windows or panels fitted into buildings) to find new 
definitions for glass. Because the Bauhaus aspired to 
the integration of painting and sculpture within 
architecture, the institution encouraged him to 
search tor the structural rather than the isolated. To 
fulfill these new demands, Albers began to develop a 
new technique for glass imagery in order to make- 
works that would no longer be composed of separate 
elements, like mosaic or stained glass, but would be 
one piece, truly architectural in character, lie turned 



[9 




20 to flashed glass, which is intimately telated to 

etching and allows the artist a similar precision of 
effect. Rather than use acid, as in etching, Albers 
used sand under pressure. Nicholas Fox Weber has 
described both the process and the results that can 
be attained from the medium with such succinct 
accuracy that I can do no better than to quote him: 

He invented a technique for sandblasting layers of opaque 
glass that were fused — or flashed — together. . . . He 
started with a sheet of opaque, pure white milk-glass 
coated with a hair-thin layer of glass in a second color: 
red, yellow, black, blue or gray. The front color was melted 
on by blowing the glass a second time. On top of it Albers 
placed a stencil cut from blotting paper; then he 
sandblasted with a compressed-air blower to remove all the 
areas of the surface that the stencil allowed to remain 
exposed. {Sandblasting enabled him to obtain sharper 
contours than would have been possible to achieve through 
chemical treatment with acids. ) After removing the stencil, 
he generally added another color with paint {often a 
glass-painter 's black iron oxide); finally he baked the 
White Cross Window, 1955. Window of photosensitive glass entire piece in a kiln to make the paint permanent. There 

panels in Abbot's Chapel, St. John's Abbey Church, wen vanatwm on the process. Intense sandblasting would 

Collegeville, Minnesota. nvml fh mIk _ g / ass background ... ; sandblasting for 

Fugue, 1925. Sandblasted opaque flashed glass with black paint, a shorter tme would dul1 a t0 P ^ °f black t0 P rodm ' e a 
24.8 x 65.7 cm (9 V., x 25 A inches). The Josef Albers dark gray. . . . Sometimes Albers used more than one 

Foundation gl-6. stencil on a single work. . . . 

Albers was able to achieve light of a striking quality 
with the opaque milk-glass. It is, in fact, a light reflected 
off an opaque surface that gives the illusion of being light 
shining through a translucent medium. We feel as if the 
main light source is behind the object, whereas in reality it 
comes from the side that we are on {although back lighting 
can be an important secondary source). Albers outdid 
nature in these flashed-glass pieces. He used opaque glass to 
create an apparent translucency more powerful than actual 
translucency, and he made reflected light appear to be light 
coming from a direct source.'' 

The works Albers produced with this method 
during the 1920s have a great variety that ranges 
from the severely rectangular rhythmic calculations 
of City (1928, cat. no. 27) to the rounded, more 
impish Diskant VII {Treble Clef 1932, cat. no. 52). In 
this decade, Albers continued his inquiry into the 
significance of the color-light conundrum while 
opening a new chapter in his development — the 
exploration of the variable relationships between 
figure and ground — that would preoccupy him to 



the end of his days. Within art criticism there is 
still no adequate vocabulary to discuss light as color, 
and color as light, phenomena that we all respond to 
as individuals. All that can be said with some 
semblance of accuracy is that Albers's interests 
in color are altogether different from the color 
elaborations we find in De Stijl or Russian 
Constructivist images. In Piet Mondrian or Kazimir 
Malevich, color is reduced to its lowest denominator 
of primary, or at most secondary, hues. At the same 
time, color is meant to be associated with and 
absorbed by structure, becoming a function of form 
and rigorously impervious to the intimations of 
mood or emotion. In Albers, although color always 
interpenetrates form, it retains a high degree of 
autonomy, setting the tone of his works just as 
structure sets their tempo. The lyrical is dominant 
in Albers's works, even in those that are the most 
soberly analytical. In these aspects, he remains 
solidly within the German Romantic tradition. 

Albers's second preoccupation — the constantly 
shifting relationships between figure and ground — 
is slightly more amenable to language than is color. 
From this perspective, Albers's work has little to do 
with De Stijl. Mondrian never allowed a discrepancy 
between figure and ground. Even in his most "pure" 
paintings, those in which white reigns almost 
autocratically over black (or black plus one primary 
color), all pictorial elements are integrated in a 
continuous, inviolable ground. In Albers, by 
contrast, it is precisely the tension between what is 
immediately perceived as ground or as figure that 
generates the vitality of his art. 

The architectural character of Albers's flashed-glass 
panels is fully apparent in Fuge (Fugue, 1925, cat. 
nos. 12, 13), in which six groups of black and white 
rectangles are composed horizontally against an even 
red ground. Within these individual clusters, the 
red appears sometimes as ground, showing through 
the mesh of black and white rectangles, and 
sometimes as figure — the red rectangles that exist as 
autonomous colored forms. In this way, Albers 
creates a supple modulation of planar and spatial 
relationships. We can easily perceive this ambiguous 
relationship in, for example, the third group from 
the right, in which a large red rectangle asserts itself 
as a finite form. This rectangle, however, does not 
belong to the plane defined by the black and white 
rectangles; it "bleeds" into the red ground between 
the short white rectangles to the right and forms 



21 




Piet Mondrian, Composition / \, 19^0. Oil on canvas, 75.2 x 
75.2 cm (29 V« x 29 V" inches). Solomon R. Guggenheim 
Museum, Hilla Rebay Collection, 1971 71.1936 R96. 



22 longer bars to the left. These red bars ultimately 

become part of the ground again at the top and the 
bottom of the series of white bars, as if the white 
bars were a bridge over a red channel connecting the 
upper and lower registers of the ground. Even more 
amazing are the changes that occur within the red 
depending on whether it is tightly circumscribed by 
black or white elements or whether it stands as a 
continuous large surface. 

The rhythmic articulation of this panel is equally 
complex. The varying heights of each of the six 
groups rise to a slight crescendo, creating a subtle, 
central, vertical axis. This central focus prevents the 
panel from being read like an unending, evenly 
paced Chinese scroll. The rhythmic rising and 
dipping of the silhouettes adds an undulating effect 
to the rectangular rigidity of the individual groups 
and keeps the composition supple in spite of 
Albers's insistence on austere, interlocking, 
rectangular forms. 

Factory (1925, cat. no. 9) is somewhat more 
complex than Fugue because it continues the spatial, 
rhythmic, and coloristic research of the latter while 
introducing recognizable subject matter. It would 
probably be impossible to establish whether Albers 
titled Factory before, during, or after the work's 
completion. Did he set out to paint a factory, or did 
the theme of a factory building sidle into the 
composition inadvertently? 7 At any rate, the factory 
appears in several guises. If interpreted as a frontal 
view, the group of black squares on a white ground 
at the left represents the facade in strong sunlight, 
while the clusters of black and white squares on 
red (just to the left of the four dominant black 
verticals) and of red squares on black (to the right 
of the same black verticals) show the same facade 
under different lighting conditions, in shadow or at 
night. The black verticals declare themselves as 
smokestacks, and the long white and black lines at 
the extreme left and right of the composition can 
be read as exterior walls enclosing the factory yard. 
Simultaneously, Factory can be seen as the 
diagrammatic ground plan of a modern factory. 

The subject of the work, however, is secondary 
to the extraordinary magic that Albers created 
through the interplay of the three colors that 
act interchangeably as figure and ground. We 
realize in this work that Albers achieved the total 
interpenetration of color and rhythm. The black 
squares on the red ground in the extreme lower- 



right corner, in particular, produce a startling effect. 
Instead of acting as interstices in a grid as do the 
other clusters of squares, these shapes appear like 
islands awash in a surrounding red liquid. The 
metamorphosis of form and of perception has rarely 
known such a triumph. 

The organization of City depends on clearly 
defined groups of vertical elements constituted by 
black and white rectangles interspersed with 
similarly shaped red forms. These reds read 
sometimes as parts of the surrounding matrix and 
sometimes as red rectangles with an independence 
equal to that of their neighboring black and white 
elements. The red areas derive what little sense of 
structure they have only from the frame containing 
the composition. The dynamic play of ground 
against figure makes City representative of Albers's 
works in glass of the 1920s. Albers abandoned that 
interest in only a very few works; it is in those rare 
works, such as Dominating White {192.J, cat. no. 20), 
that he drew closest to the tenets and aspirations of 
DeStijl. 

Toward the end of the 1920s, Albers introduced a 
surprising variant into his formal repertoire: the 
whimsical transformation of objects into pictorial 
motifs. Perhaps these more playful compositions 
mark one of the most important transitional periods 
in Albers's life and work. He could now break away 
from the discipline of his structured, austere work 
conceived along lines dictated by Bauhaus 
principles. Coincidentally, the world around him 
was swiftly darkening, and the rising tide of Nazism 
was probably more clearly perceptible from the 
vantage point of the Bauhaus than anywhere else. 
Needing to find an antidote within himself for 
sustenance, he drew upon wit and upon what the 
Elizabethans called "conceits." 

The first of this group of glass panels that employs 
exterior reality as a point of departure is Interior a 
(1929, cat. no. 36). This panel marks the transition 
from Albers's earlier structural compositions to 
the humorously jazzy contemplations of random 
objects, such as Handschuhleisten {Glove Stretchers, 
1928, cat. no. 26), or conventional symbols, such as 
Treble Clef. Though in Interior a Albers depicted a 
recognizable subject (which includes windows with 
mullions that once again suggest Christ's cross), he 
dealt with the same perceptual problems of distance, 
ground, and rhythmic variations on a theme as in 
the earlier glass compositions. 



Glove Stretchers is a far more enterprising departure. 
Deceptively simple, the work quickly becomes a 
teasing conundrum as soon as we examine it 
attentively. To begin with, the image evokes the 
comparison of glove stretchers to hands, as well as 
the equation that glove stretchers are the interior 
diagrams of gloves as gloves are the exterior 
diagrams of hands. This perplexing relationship 
between organic and inorganic becomes the subject 
of the picture. The deliberate ambiguity of the form 
at the right leads to further speculation. Is that 
shape a hand or glove? Is its solid white patch a 
"hole" exposing a white ground hidden behind the 
dominant gray expanse, or is it light modeling the 
black "hand"? Also teasing are the two elements 
clearly defined by their hooks as glove stretchers. 
Near reversals of each other, the form at the left, 
with fingers pointing up, is white against a black 
ground, and the other stretcher, with fingers 
pointing down, is black against a white profile, 
rather than a white ground. The pattern of diagonals 
that traverse both glove stretchers follows suit. In 
the white glove stretcher, the diagonals are the black 
lines that command the entire gray field, while in 
the black stretcher, those narrow black lines 
abruptly turn into gray ones and the gray ground 
becomes wide black bands. In addition, the 
horizontal black strip at the bottom of the panel 
and the white one at the top are problematic in that 
they do not inhabit the same spatial planes as the 
image's other blacks and whites. We are in turn 
bemused, baffled, and even irritated by the insidious 
ingenuity of this very simple graphic image. 

The unusually ambitious, large Treble Clef of 1932 
is somehow more harmonious, more sensuously 
satisfying than the other glass paintings dealing 
with recognizable forms. In it, glass reveals its full 
power to unite both the material and the spiritual 
realms. The white area seems to absorb light into its 
very core so that what is essentially a glossy, hard 
substance becomes an immaterial white aura. Just as 
Albers was capable of making antagonistic colors 
coexist, he was able to harmonize various degrees of 
reflection, refraction, and absorption of light 
without sacrificing the individual characteristics of 
these properties. 

Albers transposed the treble clef, a familiar symbol 
depending on sheer convention tor its meaning, into 
a purely pictorial motif by putting it in apposition 
to a ground that shifts dynamically from gray to 




23 




Factor), 1925. Sandblasted flashed glass with black paint, ;s 8 x 
45.8 cm (14 'A x 18 7«. inches). Yale University Art Gallery, 
New Haven 1 977.1 60.1. 

Glim Stretchers, 1928. Sandblasted opaque Sashed ,ulass, 
40 x 52.9 cm (15 '/, x 20 "/.1. inches). The Josef Albcts 
Foundation GL-19. 



M 




black to white. We can best appreciate the 
sophistication of Albers's tactics by seeing how 
he weaves the ground into the treble clef 
without losing the differentiation between ground 
and figure. 

In 1933, the year after Treble Clef was created, the 
Bauhaus closed and Albers left for the United States, 
bringing this stage of his career — and, for the 
most part, his work in glass — to an end. While he 
would go on to conquer new terrain in America 
and establish for himself a key position in the 
history of twentieth-century art, perhaps the single 
work that exemplifies the astonishing vitality and 
endurance of Albers's contribution is City. The very 
title that he gave the work in 1928, City — not 
"Stadt" or "metropolis" — hints at the role America 
was beginning to play in the European imagination 
and foreshadows his own emigration. Albers was 
one of the few artists whose European origins and 
subsequent career in America affected the 
maturation of American art and the unprecedented 
international nature of art after World War II. It 
may very well be that it was his faculty for grasping 
what was essential in the whole tenor of twentieth- 
century urban life that enabled him to enter so 
smoothly into the mainstream of American art and 
exercise such an enormous influence, not by means 
of the exotic appeal that so many of the later 
immigrant artists had, but because he was a truly 
intercontinental talent. In 1963, he expanded City 
into a gigantic Formica screen that was titled 
Manhattan and installed over the escalators of the 
Pan American Airlines Building in New York. It is 
a measure of Albers's genius that a work of modest 
dimensions created by him in Germany in 1928 
should retain all its freshness in America, actually 
increasing in specific meaning when enlarged to 
monumental dimensions after an interval of over 
thirty years. 



Treble Clef, 1932. Sandblasted opaque flashed glass, 
76.5 x 45.1 cm (3cW« x 17 '/ 4 inches). The Josef Albers 
Foundation GL-II. 



City, 1928. Sandblasted opaque flashed glass with black 
paint, 28 x 55 cm (11 x 21 v» inches). Kunsthaus Zurich 
Inv. Nr. 1960/8. 



i. See Robert Rosenblum, Modern Painting andtbt Northern 25 

Romantit Tradition: Friedrich to Rothko (New York: Harper &lt;&amp; 

Row, 1975). Werner Hermann's nine exhibitions 111 the Kunst 

tun 1800 series were held at the I [amburger Kunsthalle from 

1974 to 1981. For their titles and catalogue information, see 

Werner Hotmann, Hamburger Erfahrungen 1969-1990 

(Hamburg: Kunsthalle, 1990), pp. is. note 2; 160-61. 

2. Of 1809-10, in the collection of the Schloss Charlottenburg, 
Berlin. 

3. Of 1807-08, in the collection of the Gemaldegalerie Neue 
Meister, Staatliche Kunstsammlungen Dresden. 

4. For Albers's early interest in German Expressionism and the 
work of Robert Delaunay, see Margit Rowell, "On Albers' 
Color," Artforum 10, no. 5 (Jan. 1972), p. 27. 

v In I, at. Park is surprisingly similar to the huge window 
Albers executed tor St. John's Abbey Church. 

6. Nicholas Fox Weber, "The Artist as Alchemist," in Solomon 
R. Guggenheim Museum, Josef Albers: A Retrospective, exhib. 
cat. (New York: The Solomon R. Guggenheim Foundation, 
1988), p. 23. 

7. Perhaps Factory was titled using a method similar to one 
often described by Kite. An as-yet-unnamed work imposed a 
"reading" upon Klee, from which he invented a suitable title. 

8. In this respect, Treble Clef is something of a precursor to the 
use of (quotidian symbols in Pop art. 



Catalogue Tins book documents all the known works in glass 

by Josef Albers. The entries in this catalogue ol the 
wall pictures — and in the two appendixes, oik oi 

destroyed and lost works, the other ol works in glass 
tor architectural projects — are based on archival 
records housed at the Josef Albers Foundation as well 
as on information provided by current owners. 

Although some of the glass pictures were exhibited 
in Germany before 1933, no records ol sales remain 
from that period. When Albers emigrated to the 
United States in 1933, friends and relatives in 
Germany kept many of the works, which later made 
their way into other collections through purchases or 
donations. Albers brought thirty-two glass pictures 
with him to the United States. The only extant list of 
these works was prepared by the art dealer John 
Becker, who received them in New York. Becker 
listed a number of the pictures by name; he referred 
to others by descriptions, such as "red and black 
enamel small"; to others he gave titles that do not 
coincide with later documentation. In this catalogue, 
the works described as having been shipped by 
Albers to the United States have been positively 
identified from Becker's list. 

The titles used in this catalogue were derived 
from Albers's inscriptions on the works and on 
photographs of them, from his handwritten lists, and 
from exhibition checklists and catalogues. Some 
titles were contemporary with the works, while 
others were conferred many years later. Known 
German titles appear first with English translations 
in parentheses. Works with English-only titles either 
had German names that Albers abandoned for 
English titles after 1933 (such as the ,S7 1 tempers, 
cat. nos. 29-32, previously referred to as Hochbauten), 
or, to the best of our knowledge, were named by 
Albers after 1933 (such as Frontal, cat. no. 21, and 
Pergola, cat. no. 34). Because Kiiistrlich (cat. no. 6) 
and Nacbrollen (no. 3 in the Appendix ol Destroyed 
and Lost Works) have been known only by German 
titles, they have not been assigned English titles. 

In the entries, height precedes width, followed by 
depth when relevant. Exhibitions and references are 
abbreviated in this catalogue; they can be found in 
full form at the ba( k oi this book. 

— B.l). 



i. Figure 

1921 

Glass assemblage mounted on brass sheet 

54.6 x 39.4 cm (21 '!•. x 15 &lt;/i inches) 

Signed and dated "Albers 1921" at lower right 

The Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York 

Gift of the Artist, 1972 1972.40.2 

Listed as Mann in checklist to exhibition in 
Braunschweig, 1933 

Exhibitions: 

Braunschweig, 1933; Cambridge, Mass., 1936; New York, 1938; 

New York, 1988 

References: 

Gomringer, 1968; Kehlmann, 1992; The Museum of Modern 
Art, 1938; Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, 1988; Spies, 
1970; Wissman, 1971 



2. Rheinhche Legende (Rhenish Legend) 

1921 

Glass assemblage mounted on copper sheet 

49.5 x 44.4 cm (19 ■/. x 17 'h inches) 

Signed and dated "Albers 1921" at lower right 

The Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York 

Gift of the Artist, 1972 1972. 40.1 

Listed as Legende in checklist to exhibition in 
Braunschweig, 1933 

Exhibitions: 

Braunschweig, 1933; New York, 1936; Cambridge, Mass., 1936; 

New Haven, 1956; New York, 1988 

References: 

Finkelstein, 1979; Gomringer, 1968; Solomon R. Guggenheim 

Museum, 1988; Yale University Art Gallery, 1956 



3. Fensterbild {Window Picture) 

1921 

Glass, wire, painted metal, nails, mesh, imitation pearls, and 

brush and ink, on painted wood box 

58.4 x 55.2 x 21.2 cm (23 x 21 &gt;/j x 8 1/8 inches) 

Signed and dated "Albers 1921" at lower right of both the 

work and box 

Hirshhorn Museum and Sculpture Garden, Smithsonian 

Institution, Washington, D.C. 

Gift of Joseph H. Hirshhorn, 1972 HMSG 72.6 

Albers had a light box fabricated for this work in 1938. The 
work has been removed from the box for display in the current 
exhibition 

Exhibitions: 

Andover, Mass., 1938; New York, 1988 

References: 

Lerner, [1974]; Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, 1988 



4. Untitled 

1921 

Glass, wire, and metal, set in metal frame 
37.5 x 29.8 cm (14 • 4 x 11 &gt;/&lt; inches) 
The Josef Albers Foundation GL-24 

Listed as Scherben und Gitterbild in checklist to exhibition 
in Braunschweig, 1933 

Exhibitions: 

Braunschweig, 1933; New York, 1988 

Reference: 

Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, 1988 



5. Gitterbi/d (Grid Mounted) 

1921 

Glass pieces interlaced with copper wire, in a sheet 

of fence latticework 

32.4 x 28.9 cm (12 v 4 x 11 »/8 inches) 

The Josef Albers Foundation GL-21 

Shipped by Albers to the United States in 1933 
(listed as Checkerboard) 

Exhibitions: 

Braunschweig, 1933; New York, 1938; New Haven, 1956; 

New York, 1988 

References: 

Benezra, 1985; Finkelstein, 1979; Gomringer, 1968; Kehlmann, 
1992; The Museum of Modern Art, 1938; Rowell, 1972; 
Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, 1988; Wissman, 1971; 
Yale University Art Gallery, 1956 



6. Kaiser/ wb 

ca. 1923 

Glass assemblage in lead support 

48 x 49 cm (18 7/8 x 19 74 inches) 

Josef Albers Museum, Bottrop 

Gift of The Josef Albers Foundation, 1980 

Exhibition: 
New Haven, 1956 

References: 

Finkelstein, 1979; Gomringer, 1968; Schumacher, 1983; 

Yale University Art Gallery, 1956 



7. Park 

ca. 1924 

Glass, wire, metal, and paint, in wood frame 

49.5 x 38 cm (19 ■/&gt; x 15 inches) 

Inscribed "Bauhaus Weimar" at lower right 

The Josef Albers Foundation GL-28 

Acquired directly from Albers by Mrs. Gretchen M. Williams 
of Winnetka, Illinois in February 1950. Sold at auction at 
Sotheby's, New York, on May 4, 1973, to McCrory 
Corporation; acquired by the Josef Albers Foundation in 1992 

Reference: 
Rotzler, 1977 



8. Factory' 

1925 

Sandblasted opaque flashed glass with black paint 

29.4 x 36 cm (11 5/16 x 14 s/16 inches) 

The Josef Albers Foundation GL-4 

Shipped by Albers to the United States in 1933 

Exhibitions: 

New York, 1936; Montreal, 1991 

Reference: 

The Montreal Museum of Fine Arts, 1991 



9. Factory 

1925 

Sandblasted flashed glass with black paint 

35.8 x 45.8 cm (14 Vs x 18 ■ v. inches) 

Inscribed "Factory" in pencil on frame 

Yale University Art Gallery, New Haven 1977. 160. 1 

Exhibitions: 

New Haven, 1956; New York, 1988; London, 1994 

References: 

Gomringer, 1958; Kehlmann, 1992; Solomon R. Guggenheim 
Museum, 1988; The South Bank Centre, 1994; Yale University 
Art Gallery, 1956 



io. Fabrik B (Factory B) 

1925 

Sandblasted opaque flashed glass with black paint 

30 x 34 cm (11 'A, x 13 i/s inches) 

Titled, signed, and dated on reverse 

Museum Morsbroich, Leverkusen 3154 

In wood frame fabricated in i960 for an exhibition 

at Galerie Suzanne Bollag, Zurich 

Acquired from Galerie Suzanne Bollag in 1963 

Exhibitions: 

Berlin, 1958; Locarno, 1959; Zurich, i960; Dusseldorf, 1970; 

Paris, 1978 

References: 

Gomringer, 1968; Musee d'Art Moderne de la Ville de Paris, 
1978; Musee National d'Art Moderne, 1978; Museum 
Morsbroich, 1985; 1903-1978 Haftpflichtverband, 1978; Stadtische 
Kunsthalle Dusseldorf, 1970 



II. Bundled 

1925 

Sandblasted flashed glass with black paint 
32.4 x 31.4 cm (12 v 4 x 12 V8 inches) 
Signed and dated "Albers 1925" on reverse 
The Josef Albers Foundation GL-5 

Exhibitions: 

London, 1962; Montreal, 1991 

References: 

Gomringer, 1958; Gomringer, 1968; The Montreal Museum of 

Fine Arts, 1991; Wissman, 1971 



12. Fuge (Fugue) 

1925 

Sandblasted opaque flashed glass with black paint 

24.8 x 65.7 cm (9 ' 4 x 25 7s inches) 

The Josef Albers Foundation GL-6 

(illustrated) 

Shipped by Albers to the United States in 1933 

Exhibitions: 

Braunschweig, 1933; New York, 1988; London, 1994 

References: 

Albers, 1933; Benezra, 1985; Finkelstein, 1979; Solomon R. 
Guggenheim Museum, 1988; The South Bank Centre, 1994; 
Staber, 1965 



13. Fuge (Fugue) 

1925 

Sandblasted opaque flashed glass with black paint 

24.5 x 66 cm (9 vs x 26 inches) 

Kunstmuseum Basel 

(not illustrated) 

This work is identical to Fuge (Fugue), cat. no. 12 

Exhibition: 
New Haven, 1956 

References: 

Albers, 1964; Gomringer, 1968; Schmidt, 1964; Staber, 1965; 

Wissman, 1971 




14- Fuge II (Fugue II) 

1925 

Sandblasted opaque flashed glass with black paint 

15.8 x 58.1 cm (6 &lt;u x 22^/8 inches) 

Signed and dated "Albers 1925" on reverse 

Hirshhorn Museum and Sculpture Garden, Smithsonian 

Institution, Washington, D.C. 

Gift of the Joseph H. Hirshhorn Foundation, 1972 HMSG 72.4 

Mounted in a composition-board frame designed by Albers 

Exhibition: 
New York, 1988 

References: 

Lerner, [1974]; Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, 1988 




15- Tektonische Gruppe (Tectonic Group) 

1925 

Sandblasted opaque flashed glass with black paint 

29 x 45 cm (11 Vs x 17 v 4 inches) 

Collection of Max Bill 

Reference: 
Bill, 1958 



16. Goldrosa 

(also known as Upward and Structure in Red) 

ca. 1926 

Sandblasted flashed glass with black paint 
44.6 x 31.4 cm (i7'V.6 x I2V8 inches) 
The Josef Albers Foundation GL-i 

Exhibition: 
Berlin, 1958 



YJ. Upward 

ca. 1926 

Sandblasted flashed glass with black paint 

44.6 x 31.4 cm (17^/16 x 12 Vi inches) 

The Josef Albers Foundation GL-2 

(illustrated) 

Shipped by Albets to the United States in 1933 
Listed as Streifenbild blau in checklist to exhibition in 
Braunschweig, 1933. Listed as Construction in Blue, White, and 
Black, 1925-26, in Yale University Art Gallery, 1956 

Exhibitions: 

Braunschweig, 1933; New York, 1938; New Haven, 1956; 

Zurich, i960; New York, 1988; Montreal, 1991 

References: 

Gomringer, 1968; Kehlmann, 1992; The Montreal Museum 
of Fine Arts, 1991; The Museum of Modern Art, 1938; 
Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, 1988; Yale University Art 
Gallery, 1956 



18. Structure in Blue 

ca. 1926 

Sandblasted flashed glass with black paint 
43.5 x 30 cm (17 'it x 11 «/i« inches) 
Collection of Sally and Eliot Robinson 
(not illustrated) 

Mounted in a composition-board frame designed by Albers 
This work is identical to Upward, cat. no. 17 



19- Latticework 

ca. 1926 

Sandblasted opaque flashed glass with black paint 

28.5 x 30.1 cm (11 v 4 x 11 7/1 inches) 

Inscribed "Latticework Albers ca. 1926" on reverse of frame 

Hirshhorn Museum and Sculpture Garden, Smithsonian 

Institution, Washington, D.C. 

Gift of the Joseph H. Hirshhorn Foundation, 1974 HMSG 74.5 

Exhibitions: 

London, 1962; New York, 1988 

Reference: 

Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, 1988 



20. Dominating White 

1927 

Sandblasted opaque flashed glass with black paint 

22.1 x 30 cm (8 "/.&lt;. x 11 'V.6 inches) 

The Josef Albers Foundation GL-3 

Shipped by Albers to the United States in 1933 

Exhibition: 
New York, 1988 

Reference: 

Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, 1988 



21. Frontal 

1927 

Sandblasted opaque flashed glass with black paint 

34.8 x 47.9 cm (13 "/.6 x 18 7 /» inches) 

The Josef Albers Foundation GL-10 

Exhibitions: 

New Haven, 1956; New York, 1988; Montreal, 1991 

References: 

The Montreal Museum of Fine Arts, 1991; Solomon R. 
Guggenheim Museum, 1988; Yale University Art 
Gallery, 1956 



22. Interlocked 

1927 

Sandblasted opaque flashed glass 

32.7 x 52.2 cm (12 7s x 20»/rf inches) 

Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, New York 

Gift, The Josef Albers Foundation, 1991 91.3877 

Facade (with Balconies) (see no. 2 in the Appendix of Destroyed 
and Lost Works) appears to have been identical to this work 



2}. Overlapping 

1927 

Sandblasted opaque flashed glass 

60.1 x 27.9 cm (23 V8 x 10 'V.6 inches) 

Inscribed, on reverse of metal support, in Albers's hand: 

"Overlapping Albers cir. 1927 can be hung from any 

side / do not stand this against wall / might slide because 

of metal frame / when dusty or soiled clean with wet 

cloth + soap"; at bottom of reverse is part of a label that 

reads: ". . . t Gemeinschaft 3346" 

The Busch-Reisinger Museum, Harvard University Art 

Museums, Cambridge, Mass. 

Purchase, Kuno Francke Memorial Fund and Association Fund 

BR49.261 

Exhibitions: 

New York, 1949; Princeton, 1971; Cambridge, Mass., 1971; 

Cambridge, Mass., 1991 

References: 

The Art Museum, Princeton University, 1971; The 
Busch-Reisinger Museum, 1971; Ehrlich, 1991; Finkelstein, 
1979; Haxthausen, 1980; Rowell, 1972; Wight, 1974 



24. Pillars 

1928 

Sandblasted opaque flashed glass with black paint 

29.9 x 31. 1 cm (11 v 4 x 12 v 4 inches) 

The Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York 

George A. Hearn Fund, 1970 1970.139 

AJbers referred to this work as Walls and Pillars I. Spies, 1970, 
uses the title Walls and Posts 

Exhibition: 
New York, 1971 

References: 

Finkelstein, 1979; The Metropolitan Museum of Art, 1971; 

Spies, 1970 



25. Walls and Screens 
(also known as Pillars II) 

1928 

Sandblasted opaque flashed glass with black paint 

30.5 x 25.8 cm (12 x 10 7s inches) 

Collection of Mr. and Mrs. James H. Clark, Jr. 

Acquired from Sidney Janis Gallery in 1965 

Exhibitions: 

London, 1962; Dallas, 1972; Austin, 1973; New York, 1988 

References: 

Comune di Ferrara, 1989; Finkelstein, 1979; Gomringer, 1968; 

Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, 1988 











































































































































































' ' ' ] 



























































































26. Handschuhleisten (Glove Stretchers) 

1928 

Sandblasted opaque flashed glass 

40 x 52.9 cm (15 ', 4 x 20'Vh, inches) 

Signed and dated "Albers 1928" on reverse of Albers's original 

composition-board frame (removed in 1987) 

The Josef Albers Foundation GL-19 

Exhibitions: 

Braunschweig, 1933; New York, 1971; New York, 1988 

References: 

Finkelstein, 1979; Gomringer, 1968; The Metropolitan 

Museum of Art, 1971; Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, 198^ 



27. City 

1928 

Sandblasted opaque flashed glass with black paint 

28 x 55 cm (11 x 21 s/8 inches) 

Kunsthaus Zurich Inv. Nr. 1960/8 

Exhibitions: 

Braunschweig, 1933; Locarno, 1959; Zurich, i960 

References: 

Albers, i960; Finkelstein, 1979; Gomringer, 1958; Lohse, i960; 

Roh, 1958; Staber, 1965; Wingler, 1969 



28. City 

1928 

Sandblasted opaque flashed glass with black paint 

33 x 55.3 cm (13 x 21 v 4 inches) 

The Josef Albers Foundation GL-14 

Badly damaged with sections of glass missing 

Albers's numerical notations in white chalk or pencil are 

visible on the surface 

Exhibition: 
New York, 1994 

References: 

Finkelstein, 1979; Staber, 1965 



■J B ?BB »W Wiif'#-;- »■■■ ■ 



29. Skyscrapers on Transparent Yellow 

1927/1929 

Sandblasted flashed glass with black paint 

35.2 x 34.9 cm (13 /s x 13 v 4 inches) 

The Josef Albers Foundation GL-9 

In early exhibition listings, no distinction is made between 
the four versions of Skyscrapers; therefore, it is not certain which 
of the pieces were shown in Braunschweig, 1933, and New 
York, 1936. The listing in the checklist to the exhibition in 
Braunschweig, 1933, includes one work titled Hochbauten, 
which is dated 1927. One work titled Hochbauten is also on the 
list of works shipped by Albers to the United States in 1933 

Exhibitions: 

Braunschweig, 1933; New York, 1936; New York, 1988 

References: 

Benezra, 1985; Gomringer, 1968; Solomon R. Guggenheim 

Museum, 1988; Spies, 1970 



30. Skyscrapers A 

(also known as Skyscrapers I ) 

Sandblasted opaque flashed glass 

34.9 x 34.9 cm (13 J/4 x 13 v 4 inches) 

Collection of Mr. and Mrs. James H. Clark, Jr. 

(illustrated) 

Acquired from Sidney Janis Gallery in 1965 

Yale University Art Gallery, 1956, dates this work to 1925 

Exhibitions (see note to cat. no. 29): 

Braunschweig, 1933; New York, 1936; New Haven, 1956; 

London, 1962; Austin, 1972; New York, 1988; Montreal, 1991 

References: 

Finkelstein, 1979; Hajos, 1933; The Montreal Museum of 
Fine Arts, 1991; Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, 1988; Yale 
University Art Gallery, 1956 



31. Skyscrapers 

1927 

Sandblasted opaque flashed glass 

36 x 36 cm (14V16 x 14V16 inches) 

Signed and initialed "Albers" and "A" twice on cardboard 

backing and also inscribed "wb 27^" 

Private collection 

(not illustrated) 

This work is identical to Skyscrapers A, cat. no. 30 

The grandparents of the current owners of the work purchased 
it from a Diisseldorf dealer in 1929. They brought it to the 
United States, via the Netherlands, during World War II. It is 
the only work in glass by Albers known to have been sold 
before he left Germany in 1933 

Exhibitions (see note to cat. no. 29): 
Braunschweig, 1933; New York, 1936 



lllllll 


llllllllll 


^~ 




^MH 


MMM MM 


^■■B 


^^M MB 


^^B 


i_ » 


^a^Ui 


MBBB — 




^^M — 




^— — 


MM 






MB 


z 






z 



32. Skyscrapers B 

(also known as Skyscrapers II) 

1929 

Sandblasted flashed glass 

36.2 x 36.2 cm (14 74 x 14 'u inches) 

Signed "Albers 1929" on reverse of frame 

Hirshhorn Museum and Sculpture Garden, Smithsonian 

Institution, Washington, D.C. 

Gift of the Joseph H. Hirshhorn Foundation, 1974 HMSG 74.6 

Yale University Art Gallery, 1956, dates this work to 1925 

Exhibitions (see note to cat. no. 29): 

Braunschweig, 1933; New York, 1936; New Haven, 1956; 

London, 1962; New York, 1988 

References: 

Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, 1988; Yale University Art 

Gallery, 1956 



33- Becber (Beaker) 

1929 

Sandblasted opaque flashed glass 
29 x 37 cm (11 7i6 x 14 '/.6 inches) 
Private collection 

In a ca. 1929 photograph, this picture can be seen hanging 
on the wall of the Albers's living room in Dessau 

References: 

Finkelstein, 1979; Grohmann, 1961 



34- Pergola 

1929 

Sandblasted opaque flashed glass with black paint 
27 x 45.6 cm (10 78 x 17 if* inches) 

Signed and dated on reverse of Albers's original composition- 
board frame (removed in 1987) 
The Josef Albers Foundation GL-26 

The title was given in 1971 at the time of the work's exhibition 
at the Albers retrospective at the Metropolitan Museum of Art 
(information in a letter dated July 22, 1971, from Kay Bearman 
to Josef Albers, in the files of the Josef Albers Foundation). 
Most likely, it was at this time too that Albers appended 
the note to this work that reads "when this side up (i.e. upside 
down) it may remind of a Mississippi steamboat" 

Exhibitions: 

New York, 1971; New York, 1988 

References: 

The Metropolitan Museum of Art, 1971; Rowell, 1972; 

Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, 1988 



35- Lauben {Bowers) 

1929 

Sandblasted opaque flashed glass with black paint 
34.6 x 45.7 cm (13 s/8 x 18 inches) 

Signed and dated on teverse of Albers's original composition- 
board frame (removed in 1987) 
The Josef Albers Foundation GL-27 

Shipped by Albers to the United States in 1933 

Exhibitions: 

Braunschweig, 1933; London, 1962; New York, 1971; 

Montreal, 1991 

References: 

Finkelstein, 1979; Gomnnger, 1968; The Metropolitan 
Museum of Art, 1971; The Montreal Museum of Fine 
Arts, 1991 



}6. Interior a 

1929 

Sandblasted opaque flashed glass 
25.6 x 21.4 cm (10 7,6 x 8 7.6 inches) 
The Josef Albers Foundation GL-17 

Two objects titled Interior 1 and Interior 2 were on the list of 
works shipped by Albers to the United States in 1933. The 
listing in the checklist to the exhibition in Braunschweig, 
1933, includes one work titled Interieur II. It is not known 
which of the four Interiors created by Albers (see also 
cat. nos. 37—39) corresponds to each of these three titles 

Exhibitions: 

Braunschweig, 1933; London, 1962; New York, 1988 

References: 

Finkelstein, 1979; Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, 1988 





II 
















































-?'•?• ^whCuS&amp;l^ ii i ■ '5 1 *' 1 













37 Interior h 
1929 



iyzy 

Sandblasted opaque flashed glass 
25.4 x 21.5 cm (10 x 8 7.c inches) 
The Josef Albers Foundation G 



GL-lfc 



Exhibitions (see note to cat. no. 36): 
Btaunschweig, 1933; London, 1962; New York, 1988 

Refetence: 

Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, 1988 



1 BB 


i 




IB 


1 


HBHHHHiil 





38. Interior A 

1929 

Sandblasted opaque flashed glass 
32.5 x 25.5 cm (12 'Vk x 10 '/i« inches) 
Josef Albers Museum, Bottrop 

Yale University Art Gallery, 1956, titles this work Interior I 

Exhibitions (see note to cat. no. 36): 

Braunschweig, 1933; New Haven, 1956; New York, 1988 

References: 

Finkelstein, 1979; Gomringer, 1968; Schumacher, 1983; 
Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, 1988; Yale University Art 
Gallery, 1956 



39- Interior B 

1929 

Sandblasted opaque flashed glass 
33 x 25 cm (13 x 9 "/16 inches) 
Josef Albers Museum, Bottrop 

Yale University Art Gallery, 1956, titles this work Interior II 

Exhibitions (see note to car. no. 36): 

Braunschweig, 1933; New Haven, 1956; New York, 1988 

References: 

Schumacher, 1983; Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, 1988; 

Yale University Art Gallery, 1956 



4-0. Fenster (Windows) 

1929 

Sandblasted opaque flashed glass 

33.6 x 37.5 cm (13 "A, x 14 1/4 inches) 

Collection of Mr. and Mrs. James H. Clark, Jr. 

Acquired from Sidney Janis Gallery in 1965 
Shipped by Albers to the United States in 1933 

Exhibitions: 

Braunschweig, 1933; New Haven, 1956; London, 1962; 

New York, 1988 

References: 

Albers, 1933; Benezra, 1985; Finkelstein, 1979; Solomon R. 
Guggenheim Museum, 1988; "Windows," 1963; Yale 
University Art Gallery, 1956 



41. Fenster (Windows) 

1929 

Sandblasted opaque flashed glass 

25 x 28 cm (9 "/.(. x 11 inches) 

Westfalisches Landesmuseum fur Kunst und Kulturgeschichte, 

Minister Inv. Nr. 1004a LM 

References: 

Gomringer, 1968; Rowell, 1972; Wissman, 1971 



42. Dom {Cathedral) 

1930 

Sandblasted opaque flashed glass 
35.4 x 49.1 cm (13 'Vi6 x 19 v.6 inches) 

Titled and dated on reverse of Albers's original composition- 
board frame (removed in 1987) 
The Josef Albers Foundation GL-13 

Shipped by Albers to the United States in 1933 

Exhibitions: 

Braunschweig, 1933; New York, 1936 





i 




V V 








r1 

r 


A 

V 

A 

r 






2 

A 


4P J 


r 


W 




1 


43 

A 


4 




1 A J 


2jm 

A 




W 


A 


rrtrrm 




A 


A 


A 


WWWW &amp; §WM 


A 




r 

A 


w 
A 


r 






r m 


r 


r 




* 


M^wm 


r A 


r A 


V 




V. 


V 


W 








\\\\m l 


v A 


\ 




,4 


A\ 

A 







43- Stufen (Steps) 

1931 

Sandblasted opaque flashed glass 
39.4 x 52.1 cm (15 '/= x 20 7 : inches) 
Family of Paul M. Hirschland 

Acquired from Gertrude Stein Gallery, New York, 1972 
Shipped by Albers to the United States in 1933 
Albers repeated this image in several mediums: casein on 
Masonite; baked enamel paint on Alumelite; gouache; 
oil on paper; and silkscreen 

Exhibitions: 

Braunschweig, 1933; New York, 1936; New York, 1988 

References: 

Gomringer, 1968; Rowell, 1972; Solomon R. Guggenheim 

Museum, 1988; Spies, 1970 



44- lm Wasser (In the Water) 

1931 

Sandblasted opaque flashed glass 
45 x 49.3 cm (17 J/ 4 x 197/16 inches) 
Josef Albers Museum, Bottrop 

Mounted in a painted wood frame designed by Albers 
Albers discussed the composition and title of this work in 
his untitled statement listed below, which is included on 
pages 141—42 of this catalogue 

Exhibitions: 

Braunschweig, 1933; New York, 1936 

References: 

Albers, 1933; Albers, n.d., untitled statement; Comune di 

Ferrara, 1989; Schumacher, 1983 



45- Kabel {Cables) 

1931 

Sandblasted opaque flashed glass 
40 x 50 cm (15 »/ 4 x 19 "/,6 inches) 

Signed and dated on reverse of Albers's original composition- 
board frame (removed in 1987) 
The Josef Albers Foundation GL-12 

Shipped by Albers to the United States in 1933 

Exhibitions: 

Braunschweig, 1933; New York, 1936 

References: 

Abstraction-Creation, 1936; Finkelstein, 1979 



46. Unmogliche (Impossibles) 

1931 

Sandblasted opaque flashed glass 

45 x 37.7 cm (17 "/.6 x 147/8 inches) 

Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, New York 

Gift, The Josef Albers Foundation, 1991 91.3878 

Shipped by Albers to the United States in 1933 

Exhibitions: 

Braunschweig, 1933; New York, 1971 

References: 

Gomringer, 1958; Gomringer, 1968; The Metropolitan Museum 

of Art, 1971; Staber, 1965 



47- Falsch gewickelt {Rolled Wrongly) 

1931 

Sandblasted opaque flashed glass 
42.1 x 42.1 cm (169/16 x 169/16 inches) 
The Josef Albers Foundation GL-22 

Shipped by Albers to the United States in 1933. Broken during 
installation at the Yale University Art Gallery in 1956, and 
subsequently repaired. Sometime after 1956, Albers had a 
reproduction made by Venus Glass Works, New York (now in 
the collection of the Josef Albers Foundation), based on his 
original 1931 drawing. In Spies, 1970, Rolled Wrongly is titled 
Incorrectly Wound 

Exhibitions: 

Braunschweig, 1933; New York, 1936; New Haven, 1956; 

New York, 1971; New York, 1988 

References: 

Abstraction-Creation, 1934; Finkelstein, 1979; The Metropolitan 
Museum of Art, 1971; Rowell, 1972; Solomon R. Guggenheim 
Museum, 1988; Spies, 1970; Yale University Art Gallery, 1956 



48. Fliegend (Flying) 

1931 

Sandblasted opaque flashed glass mounted on cardboatd 

30.2 x 35 cm (11 7 /s x 13 &gt;/ 4 inches) 

Staatsgalerie Stuttgart Inv. No. 3276 

Finkelstein, 1979, dates this work to 1926 

References: 

Finkelstein, 1979; Wissman, 1971 



49- Six and Three 

(also known as Four Sixes and Three Threes) 

1931 

Sandblasted opaque flashed glass 
56 x 35.5 cm (22716 x 14 inches) 
The Josef Albers Foundation GL-16 

Shipped by Albers to the United States in 1933 

Exhibitions: 

Braunschweig, 1933; New York, 1994 



50. Gesimse {Shelves) 

1932 

Sandblasted opaque flashed glass 
34 x 64.9 cm (13 i/s x 25 »/«! inches) 
The Josef Albers Foundation GL-15 

Shipped by Albers to the United States in 1933 

Exhibition: 
Braunschweig, 1933 



51. Klaviatur {Keyboard) 

1932 

Sandblasted opaque flashed glass 
37.3 x 64.9 cm (14 "A6 x 25^/16 inches) 
The Josef Albers Foundation GL-7 

Shipped by Albers to the United States in 1933 

Exhibitions: 

Braunschweig, 1933; New York, 1936; New York, ic 

Reference: 

Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, 1988 



52. Diskant VII {Treble Clef) 

1932 

Sandblasted opaque flashed glass 
76.5 x 45.1 cm (30 Vs x 173/4 inches) 
The Josef Albers Foundation GL-n 



53- K-Trio 

1932 

Sandblasted opaque flashed glass 
47.9 x 54.8 cm (18 7 /» x 21 »/i&lt; inches) 
The Josef Albers Foundation GL-23 

Shipped by Albers to the United States in 1933 

Exhibition: 
Braunschweig, 1933 



Appendix of Destroyed and Lost Works Of the sixty-one wall pictures in glass by Jose! 

Albers that have been identified, eight have been 
either destroyed or lost track of through the years. 
The last four works illustrated in this appendix art- 
known to us only through unlabeled photographs. 



130 i. Fabrik A {Factory A) 

1925 

Sandblasted flashed glass with black paint 
46 x 35.5 cm (18 vs x 14 inches) 
Location unknown 

Formerly in the collection of Mrs. Arnold Maremont of 
Chicago and New York. Acquired by Maremont from Galerie 
Suzanne Bollag, Zurich in i960 

Exhibitions: 

Berlin, 1958; Locarno, 1959; Zurich, i960 

Reference: 
Gomringer, 1958 



2. Facade {with Balconies) 

1927 

Sandblasted opaque flashed glass 

Destroyed 

Shipped by Albers to the United States in 1933. Broken in 1962 
during transport to London for exhibition at Marlborough Fine 
Art Ltd. Interlocked {cm. no. 22) appears to be identical to this 
work. Listed as Fassade in checklist to exhibition in 
Braunschweig, 1933 

Exhibitions: 

Braunschweig, 1933; London, 1962 




3- Nachrollen 

[931 

Sandblasted flashed glass 

Location unknown 

Dated [93] in checklist to exhibition in Braunschweig, [933 

Exhibitions: 

Braunschweig, [933; New Haven, 1956 

Reference: 
Loew, 1956 



4. Kegel-Zy Under {Cone-Cylinder) 

[932 

Sandblasted Hashed glass 
Location unknown 

Exhibition: 
Braunschweig, 1933 

Reference: 
Finkelstein, 1979 



5. Title unknown 

Sandblasted flashed glass 
Location unknown 




t31 




I 

L 



132 6. Title unknown 

Sandblasted flashed glass 
Location unknown 



7. Title unknown 

Sandblasted flashed glass 
Location unknown 




8. Title unknown 

Sandblasted flashed glass 
Location unknown 




"33 



Appendix of Works in Glass for 
Architectural Projects 



Josef Albcrs had a strong penchant for architectural 
projects in which all of the arts were- combined. He 
cared greatly about the entire visual environment, 
including design, furniture, painting, and all 
myriad details of fenestration, ornament (or its lac k), 
and household objects. There-fore, it was with 
particular enthusiasm that he undertook the design 
of glass windows for a range of buildings. The first 
he designed, for St. Michael's Church in his 
hometown of Bottrop, was Rom mystiui ora pro nobis 
in 1917. Later, at the Bauhaus, he worked on 
commissions for buildings as new and pioneering in 
their way as the abstract compositions he was 
making from glass shards and bottle fragments and 
from neat geometric forms of glass in vibrant colors. 
The first such commission was a window for the 
Sommerfeld house, designed by Walter Gropius and 
Adolf Meyer in 1920. This pioneering venture in 
Berlin provided an opportunity for Albers and 
several other Bauhaus students to see their design 
work put to everyday use (Joost Schmidt carved the 
beams; Marcel Breuer made some of the furniture). 
From then on, Albers seemed to relish every 
opportunity for architectural work. His Bauhaus 
affiliation led to projects for windows in the 
director's office at the school in Weimar, the Otte 
house in Berlin, and the Grassi Museum in Leipzig. 
Through his marriage to a member of a prominent 
Berlin publishing family, he- de-signed three stained- 
glass windows for the Ullstein publishing house in 
Berlin-Tempelhof in 1928. These commissions 
represent some of the most vibrant and inventive of 
his compositions in glass. 

Alas, all of the architectural projects in glass that 
Albers made in Germany were- destroyed during 
World War II. In America in the 1950s, he happily 
accepted two further commissions for works in 
glass — White Crow Windou at St. John's Abbey 
Church in Collegeville, Minnesota (designed by 
Breuer) in 1955, and door panels for the Todd 
Theater in Chicago (designed by Bertrand 
Goldberg) in 1957. Both projects gave him vast 
pleasure, as did the fireplace walls and other 
architectural projects he tarried out over the years in 
the country that became his safe haven. But the 
most original and inventive of his puces in class, 
made just at the time he was discovering all of its 
possibilities, remain to us only in photographs. A 
complete, illustrated list follows. 



135 



-N.F.W 



136 i. Rosa mystka ora pro nobis, St. Michael's Church, Bottrop, 

Germany 

Stained-glass window 

Executed by Puhl &amp; Wagner-Gottfried Heinersdorf, Berlin 
1917-18 
Destroyed 




2. Sommerteld house, Berlin-Steglitz 
Stained-^lass window in second-floor stairwell 
Executed by Albers in the ^lass workshop at Weimar 
1920-21 
Destroyed 



3. Dr. Otte house, Berlin-Zehlendort 

Stained-glass window in stairwell 

Probably executed by Puhl N: \\ a^ner-Gottfritt 

1 [einersdorf, Berlin 

1921-22 

Destroyed 




137 





lLi 


■ fc^ 


u 


4 — "'Wl 


L 1 


r 1 1 1 f — 


— P— r-rr-W 


1 1 




WsW 1 






in— 






■T 




^_F 










Hr^' 


' ' Br 


i' 


FrH .1 






ii \\ 


' If 




■T ■ 


^TTt__ 








hk.h4jL B 




1 


• i-L 


^k~t 


™rj 








t ' [1 









138 4- Grassi Museum, Leipzig 

Ten stained-glass windows in first- and second-floor stairwells 
Executed by Puhl &amp; Wagner-Gottfried Heinersdorf, Berlin 
1923 
Destroyed 




v Red and Whitt Windou . Bauhaus, Weimar 

Stained-glass window in antechamber of director's office 
Executed by Albers for the first Baubam Ausstel/ung (Bauhaus 
Exhibition) 

1923 
Destroyed 



6. Ullstein Publishing House, Berlin-Tempelhot 

Three stained-glass windows in workers' entrance hall 

Executed by Puhl &amp; Wagner-Gottfried Heinersdort, Berlin 

1928 

Destroyed, probably during occupation by the Red Army 

in 194s 











































1 1 

L .. 1 


















1 


1 1 




















































■ 





















































































[39 




140 7- White Cross Window, Abbot's Chapel, St. John's Abbey 

Church, Collegeville, Minnesota 
Window of photosensitive glass panels 
Executed by Corning Glass Works, Corning, New York 
1955 



8. Todd Theater, Chicago 
Sandblasted-glass illuminated door panels 
1957 




"A New Type of Glass Picture' 

Jose) Alberi 



Glass paintings ordinarily arc transparent and 
therefore window pictures. They are composed from 
differently colored pieces of glass usually held 
together with lead. 

With my wall glass paintings I have developed a 
new type of glass picture. 

By using opaque glass and only one pane tor a 
picture I achieved the movability oi a small easel 
painting permitting [it] to be hung on a wall, as 
well as to be mounted into the wall as a fixed 
architectural part, both indoors and outdoors. 

The technique applied is sandblasting. The 
material used is flashed glass which in most cases 
consists of a milk glass body covered in front with a 
hair-thin glass film — the Bashing coat — of another 
color, for the most part black or red, but available 
also in other colors. 

Sandblasting is used the way the tombstone carver 
applies it for engraving of names which, nowadays, 
is rarely done by chiseling. 

The glass to be sandblasted has to be covered with 
an especially prepared stencil paper or rubber pasted 
air-tight upon the pane. Into this stencil cover the 
design has to be cut out. First the forms to appear 
white. These must be engraved through the front 
layer of the flashing coat into the milk glass body of 
the glass. The sand blown with great pressure from 
the sandblaster will grind a relief into the glass 
wherever it is uncovered. It works similar to 
fluorhydric acid used in hyalography, but more 
precisely. 

A short treatment with sandblasting achieves, 
instead of making a relief, only a dulling of the 
glossy surface, a process used tor making frosted 
glass. I have used this method to produce a dull dark 
grey on a shiny deep black. The grey torms require a 
second cut of the stencil and a second but shorter 
sandblasting. Besides sandblasting it is possible to 
apply also glass painters' colors which become 
permanent after burning in a kiln. 

This will explain that the color and form 
possibilities are very limited. But the unusual color 
intensity, the purest white and deepest black and the 
necessary preciseness as well as the flatness of the 
design elements offer an unusual and particular 
material and form ettcc t . 

Particularly "White Cross" (see no. 7 in the 
Appendix of Works in C dass for An hite&lt; t ural 
Projects} should speak by itself, through its 
simplii itv 111 composition and color: the latter only 



graduated violets on white. Though almost 
mathematical in form and measurement, its radial 
and static symmetry, I believe, improves its mystic 
atmosphere and vibration. 

Concerning "In the Water" [see cat. no. 44], I 
should like to mention its economy in design. It is 
constructed only with equally long horizontals and 
equally high curves moving vertically. This order 
permits the most simple stencil cut possible. (The 
stencil is necessary since the glass painting is made 
in opaque glass and executed with sandblasting 
only.) So the composition is appropriate to material 
and technique. 

The design elements are strictly two-dimensional. 
All lines exist only mathematically, that is, not by 
themselves, but only as boundaries between 
different color areas. The three colors, white, black, 
grey, are actually two colors, namely, white and 
glossy and dulled black. All color areas are without 
modulation, therefore flat. 

Despite the emphasized two-dimensionality of the 
design elements, the picture appears voluminous 
and spatial, and even transparent, though the colors 
are opaque. This has been achieved through 
graduated distances between the horizontals and 
through interpenetrations which function as 
overlappings. This results in heaping and 
accentuation within the groups of equally colored 
stripes. Thus the whole produces an illusion of 
plastic movement. 

This painting is not representative but abstract. It 
is not an abstraction derived from an experience in 
nature. Its name has been chosen — after the 
composition had been finished — because it reminds 
me of the movement of water plants. Therefore the 
name functions as distinction, not as topic. 

Untitled statement on the glass pictures, n.d., 
Josef Albers Papers, vol. 2, Sterling Memorial 
Library, Manuscripts and Archives, Yale University, 
New Haven. 



Chronology 



Earl) Years 

1888 

Horn Marc h i i ) in Bottrop, .1 

small industrial c ity in the 

Ruhr distric r. Germany, the 

oldest son of Lorenz Albers 

and Magdalena S&lt; humacher 

Albers. 

1902-05 

Attends Praparanden-Sc hule, 

Langenhorst. 

1905-08 

Attends Lehrerseminar 
(Tea&lt; hers College). Biiren; 
receives teacher's certificate 



mstriK !&lt;&gt;r. Begins 
independent work in stained 
glass. Exe&lt; litis Insi 
lithographs and bloc k prints, 
some oi whi&lt; h are exhibited 
in 191K at Galerie Goltz, 
Munich. Makes additional 
figurat ive drawings, 
mi hiding portraits, self- 
portraits, and images of (arm 
animals and lo&lt; aJ s&lt; enery. 
Albers's style, while 

reiki ting his awareness ol 

contemporary European 
artistic movements, begins to 

emerge with an emphasis on 
pru ise ami illation and 
visual spareness. 



ottii e 111 Weimar. These ari 
1 omplex abstrai 1 
1 omposit urns juxtaposing 
multiple pieces ol i It .ir and 
1 olored single-pane glass. 
Also makes wood furniture 
for ( rropius's ofi 

[921-22 

Makes glass assemblages, in 
whic h he usrs detritus from 
the dump in Weimar. 

[922 

Promoted to level ol 

jouriii \ man at the Bauhaus 
Reorganizes the glass 
workshop. 



1908 

Visits museums in Munich 
and the Folkwang Museum, 
I lagcn, where he first sees 
paintings by Paul Cezanne 
and Henri Matisse. 

1908-13 

Teaches public school, 
primary grades, in small 
towns and then in Bottrop, 
lor the Westfalian regional 
teaching system. 

[913-15 

Attends Komgliche 
Kunstschule, Berlin, where 
he studies art education 
under Philipp Franck. 
Exempted from military 
sen ue because of teat hing 
affiliation. Visits state 
museums and galleries in 
Berlin. Executes first 
figurative oils, mostly boldly 
colored still lifes. and 
drawings rem in 1 si en t of 
Albrccht Durer. 

[915 

Ki 1 1 i\es certificate as art 

teacher. 

[916—19 

While still teaching in 
public schools in Bottrop, 
attends Kunstgew t rbest hule. 
Essen. Studies with fan 
Thorn-Prikker, a Stained- 
glass art isan ami draw ing 



1917 

Designs Rosa wi ttica orapro 

nobis, stained-glass window 

commissioned for St. 

Michael's Church, Bottrop 

(destroyed). 

1919-20 

At Komgliche Bayerische 

Akademie der Bildenden 

Kunst, Munich, attends 
Franz von Stuck \ drawing 
class and Max Doerner's 
course in painting technique. 
Makes many figurative 
drawings there, as well as 
brush and ink drawings of 
the rural Bavarian town of 
Mittenwald. 

Bauhaus 

1920 

Attends the Bauhaus in 

Weimar, when- he takes the 

preliminary course and 
begins independent Study m 
glass assemblage, from this 
point, all of his art. with the 
ex&lt; eption of Ins photographs 
and designs tor turn tional 
obje&lt; ts. is abstrai t. 

1920-23 

Creates stained-glass 
windows tor houses in Bi rim 
designed by Walter Gropius, 

founding direi tor of the 

Bauhaus. and tor the 

in epi ion room of Gropius s 



1923 

ln\ iteil by Gropius to 

condiu t preliminary c oursc 
in material and design. 
Designs stained-glass 
windows for (irassi Museum. 
Leipzig (destroyed). 

1924 

I nst essaj . 1 listnrisi h oder 

jetzig?" is published in 

special Bauhaus issue of 
Hamburg periodical _///«#* 
Menschen. 

1925 

Movi s w nil ilu Bauhaus 

to Dessau Appointed 
Bauhaus master Marries 
Anneliese Fleisi hmann, a 
wra\ ing student at the 
Bauhaus Travels to Italy. 
Develops sandblasted 

flashed -lass paini ings with 
mi reasingl) refined 

geometric compositions. 
I le 1 ontmues making 
these m what becomes 

know n as his "thermonn ti r" 
Style tor the next tour 
\ears 

[926 

D&lt; signs tea glasses ol glass, 
metal, wood, plastic . and 
porcelain and begins 
working m typography. 
Designs furniture, 
primarily in wood and -lass, 
tor the Berlin apartment of 



144 




Albers (third from right) and 
friends, Berlin, ca. 1914. 



Drs. Fritz and Anno 
Moellenhoff. 

1926-32 

Takes numerous black-and- 
white photographs, many of 
which he mounts as photo- 
collages, including portraits 
of his Bauhaus colleagues. 

1928 

Gropius leaves the Bauhaus 
and is replaced by Hannes 
Meyer. Albers takes charge of 
the preliminary course and 
lectures at the International 
Congress for Art Education, 
Prague. Designs an 
upholstered wood chair. His 
stained-glass windows for 
Ullstein Publishing House, 
Berlin-Tempelhof, are 
executed (destroyed); here, 
as in the Grassi Museum 
windows, the design is a 
more simplified geometric 
abstraction than in earlier 
works. 

1928-30 

Following Marcel Breuer's 
departure in 1928, Albers 
assumes directorship of the 
furniture workshop, a 
position Breuer had held 
since 1925. Heads wallpaper- 
design program. 

192.9 

Shows twenty glass paintings 
in exhibition of Bauhaus 
masters in Zurich and Basel; 
other artists featured include 
Vasily Kandinsky and Paul 
Klee. Designs a chair for 
mass production. 

1929-32 

Continues to make 
sandblasted glass 
constructions, now using 
illusionistic, volumetric 
forms, most of which 
combine straight lines and 
curves. 

1930 

Ludwig Mies van tier Rohe 

repl.K cs Meyer as director of 



the Bauhaus; Albers becomes 
assistant director. 

1932 

Moves with the Bauhaus 
to Berlin. Has first solo 
show at the Bauhaus, a 
comprehensive exhibition of 
glass works from 1920 to 
1932. In addition to basic 
design, teaches freehand 
drawing and lettering. 
Begins Treble Clef series in 
different mediums, his first 
major use of a single form 
repeated with very slight 
compositional variations in 
many different color 
schemes. 

1933 

With other remaining 
faculty members, closes the 
Bauhaus. Executes series of 
woodcut and linoleum-cut 
prints in Berlin. 

Black Mountain College 

1933 

On the recommendation of 
Philip Johnson at the 
Museum of Modern Art, 
New York, Josef and Anni 
Albers are invited to teach at 
the newly founded Black 
Mountain College, North 
Carolina, where they arrive 
on November 28. Albers is 
based there for the next 
sixteen years. 

1934 

Gives lecture series at 
Lyceum, Havana, Cuba. 
Executes woodcuts and 
linoleum cuts in Asheville, 
North Carolina, near Black 
Mountain College. 

I93S 

Makes first of fourteen visits 
to Mexico and Latin 
America. Paints first free- 
form abstractions. 

1936 

Executes series of spare 

geometric drawings. 



1936-40 

At invitation of Gropius, 
holds seminars and lectures 
at the Graduate School of 
Design, Harvard University, 
Cambridge, Massachusetts. 
Paints, in gouache and oil, 
various small series of 
geometric abstractions of 
highly diverse imagery. 

1936-41 

Exhibits glass paintings from 
the Bauhaus period, new oil 
paintings, and other works in 
over twenty solo shows in 
American galleries. 

1937 

Included in first American 
Abstract Artists exhibition at 
Squibb Galleries, New York, 
April 3-17. 

1939 

Becomes a United States 

citizen. 

1940-42 

Makes autumn-leaf collages 

and small drypoints of 

meandering linear 

compositions. 

1941 

Takes a sabbatical year, 
painting in New Mexico 
and teaching basic design 
and color at Harvard. 

1941-42 

Executes Graphic Tectonic 
series of drawings and zinc- 
plate lithographs featuring 
geometric imagery 
that emphasizes the use of 
drafting tools in the creative 
process. 

1942-46 

Plays increasingly active role 
in the administration of 
Black Mountain College, 
writing on educational 
theory and lecturing on 
behalf of the school. 

1943 

Begins B icon jugate and Kinetii 



series ol two-figure 

geometric abstractions. 

m4 

Makes series of prints in 

Asheville, many of which 

superimpose geometric 

figures on grounds with 

wood-grain and cork-relief 

patterns. 

1947 

Spends a sabbatical year 
painting in Mexico. Begins 
Variant series, largest group 
of paintings to date, in 
which similar geometric 
compositions are executed in 
various color schemes. These 
paintings demonstrate his 
growing concerns with the 
effects of color and its 
mutability. 

1948 

Serves as rector of Black 
Mountain College. Makes 
Multiples woodcuts in 

Asheville. 

1948-50 

Elected member of the 

Advisory Council of the Arts, 

Yale University, New 

1 Liven. 

1949 

Leaves Black Mountain 
College. Travels to Mexico 
Appointed visiting professor 
at the Cincinnati Art 
Academy and Pratt Institute, 
Brooklyn, where he teaches 
color theory and leads a 
faculty workshop. Begins 
Structural Constellations, also 
called Transformations of a 
Scheme, a series of linear, 
geometric drawings whose 
deliberately ambiguous 
imager)- offers multiple 
readings. Over the next 
twenty-five years, Albers will 
execute the Constellations as 
drawings, white line 
engravings on black Vinylite, 
prints made from engraved 
brass, inkless intaglio prints, 
embossings on paper, and 



large wall relicts made in 
various materials including 
stainless-steel tubes and 
incised marble with gold 
leaf. 

Yale University 

1950 

Begins Homage to the Square 
scries, for which he will use 
four closely related 
compositions of squares to 
present different color 
climates and activity. Over 
the next twenty-five years, he 
will render them as oil 
paintings on Masonite. 
lithographs, screen prints, 
Aubusson and other 
tapestries, and large interior 
walls in various mediums. 
Serves as visiting critic at 
Yale University School of 
Art and visiting professor at 
the Graduate School of 
Design, Harvard University. 
Appointed chairman of 
Department of Design at 
Yale- and establishes 
residency in New Haven. 
Executes America, the rear 
wall of a brick fireplace, for 
Swaine Room, Harkness 
Commons, Harvard 
University Graduate Center. 

1952 

Appointed Fellow of 

Saybrook College, Yale 

University. 

1953-54 

Lectures in the Department 
of Architecture, Universiclad 
Catolica, Santiago, and at the 
Escuela Nacional de 
Ingenieros del Peru, Lima. 
Takes position as visiting 
professor at the Hochschule 
fiir Gestaltung, Ulm, West 
Germany. 

1955 

Returns as visiting professor 
to the Hochschule fiir 
Gestaltung. Ulm. Designs 
White Cross Window for 
Abbot's Chapel, St. John's 



Abbey Church, ( ollege\ ille, 

Minnesota. 

1956 

Has first retrospective 

exhibition at Yale Universitj 
Art Gallery. Named 
Professor ol Art Emeritus at 
Yale. 

1957 

Receives Officer's Cross, 

Order of Merit, first ( lass. 
of the German federal 
Republic, and made 
honorary Doctor of Fine Arts 
at the University of 
Hartford. 

1957-58 

Teaches at Syracuse- 
University, New York. 
Appointed visiting professor 
at the Carnegie Institute, 
Pittsburgh. 

1958 

Retires as chairman of the 
Department of Design at 
Yale University; remains as 
visiting professor until i960. 
Lectures at the University of 
Minnesota, Kansas City Art 
Institute, Art Institute of 
Chicago, and Department of 
Architecture, Princeton 
University. Awarded the 
Conrad von Soest Prize for 
painting by Landesverband 
Westfalen-Lippe, West 
Germany. 

hah Years 

1959 

Awarded a Ford Foundation 
Fellowship. Executes Two 
Structural Constellations, in 
gold-leaf engraving on 
marble, tor Corning Class 
Building lobby. New York 
City, and Manuscript Wall, a 
recessed mortar composition, 
for the Manuscript Society 
Building, New 1 la\ 1 n 

i960 

Attends the Cultural 

Congress, Munich. 




'45 



Albers teaching at the 
Bauhaus, Dessau, 1928. 

Albers in front of &lt; it) . 
Dessau. 1928. 



146 




Albers teaching at Black 
Mountain College, 
August 1948. 

Albers at his home in 
New Haven, 1965. 



1961 

Executes Two Portals, a 
glass and bronze mural, for 
the Time and Life Building 
lobby, New York, and the 
brick St. Patrick's Altar 
Wall, for St. Patrick's 
Church, Oklahoma City. 

1962 

Teaches at the University 

of Oregon, Eugene. Awarded 

a Graham Foundation 

Fellowship. Named honorary 

Doctor of Fine Arts at Yale 

University. 

1963 

Receives a fellowship from 
Tamarind Lithography 
Workshop, Los Angeles. 
Interaction of Color is 
published. Executes 
Manhattan, a Formica mural, 
for the Pan Am Building 
lobby. New York, and Repeat 
and Reverse, a steel sculpture, 
for the Art and Architecture 
Building entrance at Yale 
University. 

1964 

Lectures at Smith College, 
Northampton, 
Massachusetts, and the 
University of Miami. 
Awarded a second fellowship 
by Tamarind Lithography 
Workshop. Named honorary 
Doctor of Fine Arts at 
the California College of Arts 
and Crafts, Oakland, and 
receives a medal for 
"extraordinary work in 
the field of the graphic 
arts" from the American 
Institute of Graphic Arts, 
New York. 

1965 

Delivers lecture series at 

Trinity College, Hartford, 

published as Search Versus 

Re-search. Featured in 

The Responsive Eye, a traveling 

exhibition organized by 

William Seitz for the 

Museum oi Modern Art, 

New York; .is a result, 



he comes to be regarded as 
the father of Op Art. 

1966 

Appointed visiting professor 

at the University of South 

Florida, Tampa. Receives 

honorary Doctorate of Laws, 

University of Bridgeport, 

Connecticut. 

1967 

Receives Carnegie Institute 
Award for painting at the 
Pittsburgh International 
Exhibition. Executes RIT 
Loggia Wall, in brick, for the 
Science Building, and 
Growth, painted murals, for 
the Administration Building 
lobby, Rochester Institute of 
Technology, New York. 
Named honorary Doctor of 
Fine Arts at the University of 
North Carolina, Chapel Hill, 
and honorary Doctor of 
Philosophy at the Ruhr- 
Universitiit, Bochum, West 
Germany. 

1968 

Wins the Grand Prize at 
La HI bienal americana de 
grabado, Santiago, and the 
Grand Prize for painting 
from the State of Nordrhein- 
Westfalen, West Germany. 
Receives the Commander's 
Cross, Order of Merit of the 
German Federal Republic. 
Elected member of the 
National Institute of Arts 
and Letters, New York. 

1969 

Named honorary Doctor of 
Fine Arts at the University of 
Illinois, Champaign-Urbana, 
Minneapolis School of Art, 
and Kenyon College, 
Gambier, Ohio. 

1970 

Moves from New Haven to 
Orange, Connecticut. Elected 
Benjamin franklin Fellow of 
the Royal Society of the Arts, 
London. Made honorary 
c itizen ol Bottrop. 



1971 

Gives thirteen paintings and 
fifty-eight prints to the 
Metropolitan Museum of 
Art, New York, following 
his solo exhibition there, the 
museum's first retrospective 
devoted to a living artist. 
Wins the First Medal for 
graphic arts, Skowhegan 
School of Painting and 
Sculpture, Maine. Named 
honorary Doctor of Fine Arts 
at Washington University, 
St. Louis. 

1972 

Designs Two Supraportas, a 
steel sculpture, for the 
Westfalisches 
Landesmuseum fur Kunst 
und Kulturgeschichte 
entrance, Miinster; Gemini, a 
stainless-steel relief mural, 
for the Grand Avenue 
National Bank lobby, Crown 
Center, Kansas City, 
Missouri; and Reclining 
Figure, a mosaic-tile mural, 
for the Celanese Building 
lobby, New York. Named 
honorary Doctor of Fine 
Arts at the Maryland 
Institute and College of Art, 
Baltimore. Awarded the 
Gold Medal at the First 
Graphic Biennial, Norway. 

1973 

Josef Albers, Formulation: 
Articulation published. 
Designs Stanford Wall, a 
two-sided, freestanding 
brick, granite, and steel wall, 
for Lomita Mall, Stanford 
University (installed in 
1980). Receives 
Distinguished Teaching of 
Art Award from the College 
Art Association, and 
honorary Doctorate of Laws 
from York University, 
Downsview, Ontario. Elected 
member of the American 
Academy of Arts and Letters, 
Boston. 

1974 

Elected Extraordinary 



Member of the Akademie der 
Kiinste, Berlin. 

1975 

Named honorary Doctor of 
Fine Arts at Pratt Institute, 
Brooklyn, and awarded a 
Medal of Fine Arts by t In- 
American Institute of 
Architects, New York 
Chapter. 

1976 

Designs U"m///« s \ an 
aluminum relief mural, for 
Mutual Life Centre, Sydney, 
Australia. Dies on March 25 
in New Haven; buried in 
Orange. 

Posthumous 

1976 

Named honorary Doctor of 
Fine Arts at the Philadelphia 
College of Art. 

1976-77 

Albers's figurative drawings 
and Bauhaus-period 
photographs rediscovered. 

1977-82 

Groups of Albers's paintings 
given by Anni Albers and 
the Josef Albers Foundation 
to the Solomon R. 
Guggenheim Museum, New 
York; Tate Gallery, London; 
San Francisco Museum of 
Modern Art; Musee National 
d'Art Moderne, Centre 
Georges Pompidou, Fans; 
Detroit Institute of Arts; 
Museum of Fine Arts, 
1 louston; Berlin 
Nationalgalene; Milwaukee 
Art Center; Museo de Arte 
Contemporaneo, Caracas; 
Rijksmuseum Krollcr- 
Miiller. ( )tterlo; Louisiana 
Museum ot Modern Art, 
I lumlebaek, Denmark; 
Los Angeles County Museum 
of Art; and Dallas Museum 
ot Art. 



devoted to Albers's work 
opens at Yale University Art 
Gallery, featuring gilt from 

Anni Albers and the Josef 
Albers Foundation of sixty- 
tour paintings and forty-nine 
prints. 

1983 

The Josef Albers Museum 
Opens in Bottrop, housing 
the gift from Anni Albers 
and the Josef Albers 
Foundation of 91 paintings 
and 254 prints. 

1988 
JoseJ Albers: A Retrospectivt 

opens at the Solomon R. 
Guggenheim Museum, New 
York, on the one-hundredth 
anniversary of the artist's 
birth. 

1992 
JoseJ Albers: Photographien 

1928-1955 opens at the 

Kolnischer Kunstvercin 



1978 

Permanent exhibit ion \\ tat &lt; 



'4&gt; x Exhibitions with 

Works in Glass 



192.9 

Zurich, Kunsthaus Zurich, 
Abstrakte und surrealistische 
Malerei und P/astik. 

Basel, Kunsthalle Basel, 
Das Bauhaus Dessau, 
April 20-May 9. 

1932 

Berlin, Bauhaus, Josef Albers 
Glasbilder, twenty-third 
Bauhaus Exhibition, May 1-12. 

1933 

Leipzig, Kunstverein 
Leipzig, exhibition with 
Maria Slavona, Jan. 

Braunschweig, Gesellschaft 
der Freunde junger Kunst, 
Feb. 26-March 26. (Works 
by Josef Albers, Rolf Cavael, 
Karl Sommer, and Hildegard 
Sommer-Peters.) Checklist. 

Berlin, exhibition in Albers's 
studio, July. 

1936 

New York, New Art Circle 
(J. B. Neumann Gallery), 
March 9-30. Checklist. 

Cambridge, Mass., 
Germanic Museum, Harvard 
University, Josef Albers and 
Hubert Landau, Nov. 9-30. 

1938 

Andover, Mass., Addison 
Gallery of American Art, 
Phillips Academy, 
April 10-May 8. 

New York, The Museum of 
Modern Art, Bauhaus 
ipip-ip28, Dec. 

1942 

Baltimore, The Baltimore 
Museum of Art, Abstractions 
by Josef Albers, Dec. 4, 1942- 
Jan. 3, 1943. 

1949 

New York, Egan Gallery, 
Albers: Paintings in Black, 
Grey, White. Sidney Janis 
Gallery, Albers: Paintings 
I //ltd " Variants. " Joint 
exhibition, Jan. 24-Feb. 12. 



1956 

New Haven, Yale 
University Art Gallery, 
Josef Albers— Paintings. Prints. 
Projects, April 25-June 18. 

1958 

Berlin, Amerikahaus, with 
the Akademie der Kunste, 
Josef Albers. Zum yo 
Geburtestag, May 7—31. 

1959 

Locarno, Switzerland, 
Galleria La Palma, Josef 
Albers, July 31-Aug. 21. 

i960 

Zurich, Galerie Suzanne 
Bollag, Josef Albers, 
Jan. 6-30. 

1962 

London, Marlborough Fine 
Art Ltd., Painters of the 
Bauhaus, March— April. 

1970 

DiAsseldorf, Stadtische 
Kunsthalle Diisseldorf, 
Josef Albers, Sept. 4-Oct. 4. 

1971 

Princeton, The Art Museum, 
Princeton University, 
Josef Albers: Paintings and 
Graphics. 1917-19JO, 
Jan. 5-26. 

Cambridge, Mass., The 
Busch-Reisinger Museum, 
Harvard University, Concepts 
of the Bauhaus: The Busch- 
Reisinger Museum Collection, 
April 30-Sept. 3. 

New York, The Metropolitan 
Museum of Art, Josef Albers 
at The Metropolitan Museum of 
Art, Nov. 1971-Jan. 11, 1972. 

1972 

Dallas, Dallas Museum of 
Fine Arts, Geometric 
Abstraction: 1926-1942, 
Oct. 7-N0V. 8. 

Austin, University Art 
Museum, University of 
Texas, Not So Long Ago, 
Oct. 15-Dec. 17. 



1973 

Austin, University Art 
Museum, University of 
Texas, The Non-Objective 
World. 1914-1955, 
Oct. 14-Dec. 15. 

1978 

Paris, Musee National d'Art 
Moderne, Centre Georges 
Pompidou, Paris— Berlin, 
July 12-Nov. 6. 

1980 

Stockholm, Galerie Christel, 

Albers-Paintings, Jan.— Feb. 



New York, Solomon R. 
Guggenheim Museum, 
Josef Albers: A Retrospective, 
March 24-May 29. Traveled 
to Baden-Baden, Staatliche 
Kunsthalle Baden-Baden, 
June 12— July 24; Berlin, 
Bauhaus-Archiv, 
Aug. 10-Oct. 4; Pori, 
Finland, The Pori Art 
Museum, Oct. 19-Dec. 4. 

1991 

Cambridge, Mass., Fogg 
Art Museum, Harvard 
University Art Museums, 
Images of the Modem 
Metropolis, Jan. 12-March 10. 

Montreal, The Montreal 
Museum of Fine Arts, The 
ip20s: Age of the Metropolis. 
June 20-Nov. 10. 

1994 

London, The South Bank 
Centre, organizer, Josef 
Albers. Dublin, Irish 
Museum of Modern Art, 
Feb. 3-March 27; Coventry, 
The Mead Gallery Arts 
Centre, April 23-May 21; 
Oxford, The Museum of 
Modern Art, June 26- 
Sept. 11; Norwich, The 
Norfolk Institute of Art, 
Sept. 26-Nov. 5. 

New York, American Craft 
Museum, Bauhaus Workshops: 
1919-1935, June 30-Oct. 9. 



Select Bibliography 



Abstraction-Criation, Art non- 
figuratif. Exhib. cat. Paris: 
Abstraction-Creation, [934. 

[bstraction-Creation, Art non- 
Hguratif. Exhib. cat. Fans: 
Abstraction-Creation, 1936. 

Albers, Josef. "Zu meinen 
Glas-wandbildern." A bis Z: 
Organ der Gruppt progressiva 
Kunstler (Cologne) 30, no. 3 
(Feb. 1933), pp. 117-20. 

— . "Josef Albers: 
'City 1928.'" Ztircher 
Kunstgt selhchaft. Jalmsbericht 
(Zurich), i960, pp. 52-53. 

— . "'Fugue.'" The 
Structurist (Saskatoon, 
Canada), no. 4 (Nov. 1964), 
p. 22. 



. Untitled statement 

on the glass pictures, n.d. 
Josef Albers Papers, vol. 2, 
Sterling Memorial Library, 
Manuscripts and Archives, 
Yale University, New 
Haven. In Irving Leonard 
Finkelstein, 1979. 

— . "White Cross 



Window," n.d. Archive of 
the Josef Albers Foundation, 
( )range, Conn. 

The Art Museum, Princeton 
Universit y.Jo u/ Albers: 
Paintings andGraphii r, 
ipi/-ip/o. Ed. Sam Hunter. 
Exhib. cat. Princeton: The 
Art Museum, Princeton 
University, 1971. 

Balabanoff, Doreen. "Josel 

Albers: Works in Glass." 
I.uidlim Magazine (Toronto), 
1994- 

B. Hill. HIS. _/r/it/ .Iftll 

Glasbilihr. Exhibit ion 
brochure with statements by 
Josef Albers. Berlin: 
Bauhaus, [932. 



Benezra, Neal 1). 7 In Murals 
and Sculptun ofjosej Albers. 

Outstanding Dissertations in 
the Fine Arts \m York: 
( rarland Publishing, 1985. 

Bill, Max. "Josef Albers." 
U erk (Winterthur) 45, no. 4 

(April 1958), pp. 135-38. 

The Busch-Reisinger 

Museum. Conaj 
Bauhaus: Thi Busch-Reisinger 
Museum Collection. Text by 
John D. Farmer. Exhib. cat. 
Cambridge, Mass.: The 
Busch-Reisinger Museum. 
1971. 

Comune di Ferrara, 
Padiglione d'Arte 
Contemporanea. Josef Albi rs . 
Text by Getulio Alviani. 
Exhib. cat. ferrara: Comune 
di Ferrara, 1989. 

Ehrlich, Doreen. Thi 
Bauhaus. London: Bison. 
1991. 

Finkelstein, Irving Leonard. 
'I In Lift and Art ofjosej 
Albers. Ann Arbor, Mich.: 
University Microfilms 
International, 1979. 

Gomringer, Eugen. 
"Abstrakte Kompositionen 

auf opakem Glas: Die 
Glasbilder von Josef Albers." 
Glaswelt (Stuttgart) 17 
(Nov. 1958), pp. 14-15. 

— .Josej . \lbers. Trans. 
Joyce Wittenborn. 
Additional texts by Josef 
Albers, Clara Diament dc 
Sujo, Will Grohmann, 
Nbrbert Lynton, and Mi&lt; In 1 
Seuphor. New York: George 
Wittenborn. 1968. German 
edition, Starnberg: Josef 
Keller Verlag, [971. 

( rrohmann, Will. "Josel 
Albers." Museum Journal 

i( )tti rlo), nos. 9-10 (1961 1, 
pp 2.12 i.(. Z32 J3 



genheim Museum Si 1 
Solomon K. ( ruggenheim 

Museum. 

I l.i|os, 1 . M. "Berliner 
Ausstellungen / orum, 
Zeitschrifi ftir Kunst-Bau- and 
Einrichtung 1 Bratislava, 
Czechoslovakia) }, no. 11 
(1933), p. 355. 

I [axthausen, Charles \\ '.. ed. 
1 In Bnsih-Reiunger Museum. 
New York: Abbeville, 1980. 

Kehlmann, Robert. Twentieth 
Century Stained Glass A Sleu 
Definition. Kyoto: Kyoto 
Shorn Co., 1092. 

Lerner, Abram, ed. i 
Hirshhorn Museum and 
Sculptun Garden, Smithsonian 

Institution. New York: I larry 
N. Abrams, [1974]. 

Loew, Mn hack "Albers: 
[mpersonalization in Perfect 
Form.' Art News (New York) 
55 (April 1951'''). pp. 27-29. 
Review of exhibition at 
New Haven, 1956. 

Lohse, Richard B. "Josef 
Albers: "City 1928.'" Ztircher 
Kunstgesellschafi. Jahrt tbt richt 

(Zurich), i960, pp. 53-56. 

Marlborough Fine Art Ltd 
Painten of the B am Texi 
In Will ( rrohmann. Exhib. 

Cat. London: Marlborough 
Fine Art Ltd., [962 

The Metropolitan Museum 
of An 

Metropolitan Museum uf Art. 
Text bj I lenry Geld/ahler. 
1 xhib 1 .11 \i « York: The 
Metropolitan Museum of 
Art. [97] 

The Montreal Museum of 

I in&lt; Arts I bi rp2a I 
tht Metropolis. Ed Jean ( lair. 
I xhib 1 .it Monro ..1 The 
Montreal Museum of fine 
Arts. [99] 



150 Musee d'Art Moderne 

de la Ville de Paris 
and Westfalisches 
Landesmuseum Kir Kunst 
und Kulturgeschichte. 
A bstraction-Creation . E x h i b . 
cat. Paris: Musee d'Art 
Moderne de la Ville de Paris, 
1978. German edition, 
Miinster: Westfalisches 
Landesmuseum fur Kunst 
und Kulturgeschichte, 1978. 

Musee National dArt 
Moderne, Centre Georges 
Pompidou. Paris— Berlin. 
Exhib. cat. Paris: Centre 
Georges Pompidou, 1978. 

Museum Morsbroich. 
Malerei—Plastik—Objekte. 

Leverkusen, Germany: 
Museum Morsbroich, 1985. 

The Museum of Modern 
Art. Bauhaus 1919-1928. 
Ed. Herbert Bayer, Walter 
Gropius, and Ise Gropius. 
Exhib. cat. New York: 
The Museum of Modern Art, 
1938. 

rpoj- ip/8 Haftpflichtverband 
der Deutschen Industrie 
V.a.G. -Industrie in tier Kunst. 
Karlsruhe, 1978. 

Oellers, Adam. "Die 
Eigenstandigkeit der 
modernen Glasmalerei." Die 
Waage (Aachen) 31, no. 4 
(1992), pp. 168-73. 

Koh, Franz. Geschichte der 
deutscher Kunst von 1900 bis 
der Gegenwart. Munich: 
1'. Brudemann Verlag, 1958. 

Rotzler, Willy. Constructive 
Concepts. New York: Rizznli 
International Publications, 
1977- 

Rowell, Margit. "On Allx-rs' 
( !olor." Artforum (New 
York) 10, no. 5 (Jan. 1972), 
pp. 26-37. 



Schmidt, Georg. "Josef 
Albers. Fugue 1925." 
Kunstmuseum Basel: 150 
Gemalde. 12—20 J 'ahrhundert . 
Basel: Kunstmuseum Basel, 
1964. 

Schulz, Maria-Katharina. 
Glasmalerei der klassichen 
Moderne in Deittschland. 
Frankfurt am Main: Peter 
Lang, 1987. 

Schumacher, Ulrich, ed. 
Josef Albers Museum Bottrop. 
Bottrop, Germany: Stack 
Bottrop, 1983. 

Solomon R. Guggenheim 
Museum. Josef Albers: A 
Retrospective. Essays by Neal 
D. Benezra, Mary Emma 
Harris, Charles E. Rickart, 
and Nicholas Fox Weber. 
Exhib. cat. New York: The 
Solomon R. Guggenheim 
Foundation, 1988. German 
edition, Cologne: DuMont, 
1988. 

The South Bank Centre. 
Josef Albers. Essays by 
Michael Craig-Martin, Paul 
Overy, and Nicholas Fox 
Weber. London: The South 
Bank Centre, 1994. 

Spies, Werner. Albers. 
Modern Artists, ed. Werner 
Spies. New York: Harry N. 
Abrams, 1970. 

Staber, Margit. "Farbe und 
Linie-Kunst und Erziehung: 
Zum Werk von Josef 
Albers." Neue Grafik (Olten, 
Switzerland), nos. 17—18 
(Feb. 1965), pp. 54-69, 
140-42. (In English, Freru h, 
and German.) 



Stadtische Kunsthalle 
Diisseldorf Josef Albers. 
Texts by Max Bill, 
Buckminster Fuller, Eugen 
Gomringer, Max Imdahl, 
Robert le Ricolais, Werner 
Spies, and Jiirgen Wissman. 
Diisseldorf: Stadtische 
Kunsthalle Diisseldorf, 1970. 

Wight, Frederick S. The 
Experience of Art. New York: 
Macmillan, 1974. 

"Windows." Art in America 
(New York), no. 2 (1963), 
pp. 110-12. 

Wingler, Hans M. The 
Bauhaus: Weimar, Dessau. 
Berlin. Chicago. Ed. Joseph 
Stein. Trans. Wolfgang 
Jabs and Basil Gilbert. 
Cambridge, Mass.: MIT 
Press, 1969. 

Wissman, Jiirgen. 
Josef Albers. Vol. 37, 
Monographien zur rheinisch- 
westfalischen Kunst der 
Gegenwart, ed. Dr. M. T. 
Engels. Recklinghausen: 
Verlag Aurel Bongers, 1971. 

Yale University Art Gallery. 
Josef Albers— Paintings. Prints, 
Projects. Text by George 
Heard Hamilton. Exhib. cat. 
New Haven: Yale University 
Art Gallery, 1956. 



The Solomon R. 

Guggenheim 

Foundation 



Honorary Trustees in Perpetuity 
Solomon R. ( ruggenheim 
Justin K. Thannhauser 
Peggy Guggenheim 

President 

Peter Lawson-Johnston 

\ /, t -Presidents 
Robert M. Gardiner 
Wendy L-J. McNeil 

Vice-President and Treasurer 

Stephen C. Swid 

Director 

Thomas Krens 

Sarctitr) 
Edward F. Rover 

Honorary Trustet 

Mme Claude Pompidou 

7 rustee, Ex Officii) 
Luigi Moscheri 

Director Emeritus 

Thomas M. Messer 



Trustees 

Jeanne Moutoussamj Ashe 

The Right I [onorable I arl 

( ast le Stewart 
M.ir\ Sharp ( ronson 
Michel David-Weil! 
&lt; arlo De Benedetti 
Robert M. Gardiner 
Rainer Heubach 
Barbara Jonas 
Thomas Krens 
Peter Lawson-Johnston 
Samuel J LeFrak 
Peter B. Lewis 
Natalie Lieberman 
Wendy L-J. McNeil 
Edward H. Meyer 
Marcel L. Ospel 
Ronald (). Perelman 
Michael M. Rea 
Richard A. Rifkind 
Denise Saul 
Rudolph B. Schulhd 
Terry Semel 
James B. Sherwood 
Raja W. Sidawi 
Seymour Slive 
Peter W Stroh 
Stephen C. Swid 
John S. Wadsworth. Jr. 
Rawleigh Warner, Jr. 
Cornel West 
Michael F. Wettach 
John Wilmerding 
Donald M. Wilson 
William T. Ylvisaker 



Peggy Guggenheim 
Collection 



Peggy Guggenheim 
Collection Advisory Board 

President 

Peter Lawson-Johnston 

Director 

Thomas Krens 

Honorary Chairman 
Mme Claude Pompidou 

Honorary Vice-Chairman 
The Grand Duchess of 
Luxembourg 

Chairman, Executive Committee 
Luigi Moscheri 

Chairman, Membership 

Committee 

Leopoldo Villareal Fernandez 

Honorary Members 
Olga Adamishina 
Rose-Anne D. Bartholomew 

Emeritus Members 
Enrico Chiari 
William Feick, Jr. 
Umberto Nordio 
Anna Scotti 



Members 

James Allman 

Giuseppina Araldi Guinetti 

Alexander Bernstein 

Mary Bloch 

The Right Honorable Earl 

Castle Stewart 
Claudio Cavazza 
Franca Coin 

Elizabeth Tharp Dingman 
Isabella del Frate Eich 
Rosemary Chisholm Feick 
Danielle Gardner 
Gabriella Berardi Golinelli 
Marino Golinelli 
Paolo Gori 

Jacques Hachuel Moreno 
Robert A. Hefner III 
W. Lawrence Heisey 
Lady Hulton 

Evelyn Lambert 
Jacques E. Lennon 
June Lowell 
Joan G. Van de Maele 

Cristiano Mantero 

Achille Maramotti 

Luigi Moscheri 

Conde de Navasqiies 

Giovanni Pandini 

Nancy Stockton Pierce 

Maria Pia Quarzo Cerina 

Annelise Ratti 

Benjamin B. Rauch 

Richard Rifkind 

Nanette Ross 

Aldo Sacchi 

Gheri Sackler 

Denise Saul 

Evelina Schapira 

Hannelore B. Schulhof 

James B. Sherwood 

Robert D. Stuart, Jr. 

Marion R. Taylor 

Roberto Tronchetti Provera 

Gianni Varasi 

Kristen Venable 

Leopoldo Villareal Fernandez 



Peggy Guggenheim 
Collection Staff 

Deputy Director 
Philip Rylands 

Curator 
Fred Licht 

Conservator 

Paul Schwartzbaum 

Administrator 
Renata Rossani 

Development and Public Affairs 

Officer 

Claudia Rech 

Consultant for Corporate 
Communications 
Michela Bondardo 

Public Affairs Assistant 
Annarita Fuso 

Accountant 
Laura Micolucci 

Accounting Assistant 
Gabriella Andreatta 

Museum Shop Staff 
Fabio Bobatz 
Roberta Chiarotto 
Elena Reggiani 

Deputy Director's Assistant 
Chiara Barbieri 

Security 

Alessandro Claut 
Franco Pugnalin 
Daniele Regolini 
Emilio Trevisan 

Maintenance 
Siro De Boni 



Some Other Guggenheim Museum Art Books 

Paul Klee at the Guggenheim Museum 
by Andrew Kagan and Lisa Dennison 
208 pages with 87 full-color reproductions 
and 8 black-and-white illustrations 

Watercolors by Kandinsky at the Guggenheim Museum 
by Susan B. Hirschfeld 
184 pages with 70 full-color reproductions 
and 19 black-and-white illustrations 

Mark Rothko in New York 

by Diane Waldman 

144 pages with 62 full-color reproductions 

Art of This Century: The Guggenheim Museum 

and Its Collection 

by Thomas Krens and the curators of the 

Guggenheim Museum 

344 pages with 165 full-color reproductions 

and 90 black-and-white illustrations 



Distributed by 

Harry N. Abrams, Inc. 

100 Fifth Avenue 

New York, New York 10011 

